See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/282670315

A Virtual Reality Study of Help Recognition and Metacognition
with an Affective Agent
Article · June 2015
DOI: 10.4018/IJSE.2015010104

CITATIONS

READS

3

207

1 author:
Ali Oker
Université de Reims Champagne-Ardenne
37 PUBLICATIONS   67 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE

Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects:

Embodied virtual agents and virtual reality in psychopathology. View project

La distinctivité dans la mémoire View project

All content following this page was uploaded by Ali Oker on 09 October 2015.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

60 International Journal of Synthetic Emotions, 6(1), 60-73, January-June 2015

A Virtual Reality Study of Help
Recognition and Metacognition
with an Affective Agent
Ali Oker, Centre Hospitalier de Versailles; HANDIReSP, UVSQ, Université Paris-Saclay,
Versailles, France
Matthieu Courgeon, LabSTICC, Université Bretagne-Sud, Brest, France
Elise Prigent, LIMSI, CNRS, Univ Paris Sud, Université Paris-Saclay, Orsay, France
Victoria Eyharabide, STIH, Université Paris-Sorbonne, Paris, France
Nadine Bazin, Centre Hospitalier de Versailles; HANDIReSP, UVSQ, Université Paris-Saclay,
Versailles, France
Mathieu Urbach, Centre Hospitalier de Versailles; HANDIReSP, UVSQ, Université ParisSaclay, Versailles, France
Christine Passerieux, Centre Hospitalier de Versailles; HANDIReSP, UVSQ, Université
Paris-Saclay, Versailles, France
Jean-Claude Martin, LIMSI, CNRS, Univ Paris Sud, Université Paris-Saclay, Orsay, France
Michel-Ange Amorim, CIAMS, Univ Paris Sud, Université Paris-Saclay, Orsay, France
Eric Brunet-Gouet, Centre Hospitalier de Versailles; HANDIReSP, UVSQ, Université ParisSaclay, Versailles, France

ABSTRACT
Advances in the use of virtual affective agents for therapeutic purposes in mental health opened a research
avenue to improve the way patients interpret other’s behavior as helpful instead of menacing. Here, the authors
propose an original paradigm based on affective computing and virtual reality technologies requiring the
assessment of helping intentions as well as self-monitoring metacognition. Sixteen healthy subjects played
a 38-turns card games with a virtual affective agent (MARC) during which they had to guess between two
cards the one that would be color-matched with another card. Their guesses could be oriented by the agent’s
emotional displays. Three subjective ratings on a percentage analog scale were recorded after each trial:
helpfulness, self- monitoring, and sympathy. Help recognition and self-monitoring metacognitive ratings
raise the question of the importance to enhance both components in therapeutic situations within psychiatric
populations. Overall, this study exemplifies the promising use of virtual reality settings for future studies in
the medical psychology field.
Keywords:	

Affective Agent, Emotion Recognition, Help, Metacognition, Virtual Reality

DOI: 10.4018/IJSE.2015010104
Copyright © 2015, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.

International Journal of Synthetic Emotions, 6(1), 60-73, January-June 2015 61

INTRODUCTION
The outcome of psychiatric conditions may be significantly ameliorated when a patient and
his/her caregivers and physicians are engaged in a strong therapeutic relationship. Amongst the
many factors that intervene in the building of a therapeutic relationship, many authors identified
the construct of clinical empathy as a key component. Increasing the quality of clinical empathy
may result in better short-term and long-term outcome as theorized by Neumann et al. (2009).
However, the concept of clinical empathy has multiple facets and covers at least two perspectives:
first, the professional empathetic skills toward the patients, and, second, the patient’s judgments
on the caregivers’ empathy. The first perspective may be conceptualized as the primum movens
of clinical empathy, and is thought to involve an ability to understand the patient’s situation,
perspective and feelings as well as acting in a helpful way. As stated by Hojat et al., “In terms
of patient care, empathy is defined as a cognitive attribute that involves an ability to understand
the patient’s experiences, pain, suffering, and perspective, combined with a capability to communicate this understanding and an intention to help” (pg.1564, 2002). Some authors as Decety
referred to the social neuroscience framework in an attempt to naturalize the neurocognitive
components allowing this process, recognizing that empathy in its general sense, as a motivator
of human’s caregiving behavior such as nurturing (2012).
Complicating any conceptualization attempt, the empathetic attitudes of the professionals
are observed and interpreted by the patients from their own perspective. As a specific instance
of cognitive empathy, this process may be impaired in chronic mental health conditions. Focusing on the patient’s stance within the context of therapeutic relationships, authors proposed
different tools aiming at measuring clinical empathy in order to identify the determinants of
improved caregiving. For instance, Mercer and colleagues (2004) published the Consultation
and relational empathy questionnaire (CARE) that contained items about the “doctor’s interest”
in the patient’s concern, his/her concern and compassion, and his/her help to take control and to
make a plan of action. The latter items appear of particular interest for the present work as they
raise the question of how one might recognize helping intentions in others on the basis of their
emotions, paroles and actions.
While physicians are responsible of adopting comprehensive and technically sound attitudes,
the ability to recognize that specific form of empathy is strongly challenged in psychiatric patients
suffering reduced emotion recognition and theory of mind skills, or exaggerated interpretation biases. Such a pattern of cognitive impairments is found in conditions such as autism and
schizophrenia (Eack et al., 2013) and lead to impaired functional outcome and mental handicap
(Fett et al. 2011). Recognizing a helping intention is required in order to avoid misunderstandings, intrusion and persecutory feelings during interactions with physicians, caregivers or other
supports. Unfortunately, such abnormal thoughts are not uncommon within the physician’s
office, all the more since the patient suffers severe delusional symptoms. The development of
social cognitive remediation therapies aims at reducing social handicap as well as facilitating
relationships with caregivers.

Affective Agents as a New Means to Explore Helping Behavior
These different elements forming the overall context of the present research, it appears that innovation in virtual reality techniques and especially in affective agents are promising for achieving
two goals: 1) the design of ecological but reproducible paradigms focusing on the emergence
of helping behavior and intentions attribution, 2) the design of therapeutic settings to help the
patients recognizing such behaviors and intentions. Here, we will focus on the former objective,
which is a prerequisite of the latter.
Copyright © 2015, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.

62 International Journal of Synthetic Emotions, 6(1), 60-73, January-June 2015

In the majority of experiments in healthy and pathological populations, the constructs potentially involved in intention recognition (an aspect of theory of mind) are tested with picture
stimuli, drawings, or videos that place subjects in a passive stance and require them to adopt the
third person perspective. However, such a reductionist approach was criticized as commented
by Schilbach and collaborators: “social cognition is fundamentally different when we are emotionally engaged with someone as compared to adopting an attitude of detachment and when
we are interacting with someone as compared to merely observing her” (2013, pg. 396). In line
with this claim, we will consider in the following that the phenomena related to interpersonal
interaction would lose their essence if they were reduced to separated constructs. In addition,
it seems barely conceivable to investigate specific social judgments such as helpfulness in the
absence of a pragmatic context in which help could take place. Investigating how ones interpret
others’ helping behavior requires creating a “relation” and an interactive situation with another
person in which cooperative actions and communications occur.
From an epistemological point of view, it is striking that the concepts emerging from social
neurosciences and psychopathology, as reported above, now meet some counterparts developed
in researches on affective computing and emotional agents. The issue of the determinants of a
virtual agent’s believability appears of particular relevance for designing models of trustworthy
helping relationships. One could consider the obvious flaw that would arise if one were urged
to trust and feel helped by an unrealistic, non-engaging 3D-model. Ortony states that an agent
could be more easily believed if he/she adopted a consistent, and coherent attitude, for instance,
emotions, motivations and actions that fit the actual situation, and potentially other kinds of
situations (2003). Likewise, Morrison (2009) proposed that users develop more trust towards
avatars that use both verbal, non-verbal cues and empathy cues that are accurate and appropriate
for the situation. Simmons et al. describe an attempt to improve the relationships with a virtual
receptionist by complexifying the models with cultural aspects, ethnicity, and specific actions
toward the human user such as greetings, initiative, expression of mood, verbal communication
with speech synthesis, all factors involved in an intentional behavior (2011). Moreover, it is now
well-acknowledged that synthesized personality factors could intervene to increase a model acceptability (Callejas et al., 2014).
From this brief overview of a heterogeneous literature, it appears obvious that the observable coherence between intentional and emotional behavior are key aspect to provide credible
interaction situations. As a consequence, the use of affective agents to study complex subjective
phenomena such as help, self-monitoring, etc. should rely on a clearly defined situation allowing
actions, emotions and speech-utterances to take place in an intelligible and natural way. Playing
cards offer an appropriate situation for a face-to-face interaction, guided by a quite repetitive
procedure based on alternances between the agents’ actions and the human player actions, during
which changes of attitudes are likely or even expected. Having selected for their research such a
situation, Kim and Suzuki showed that playing poker with a mechanical humanoid was able to
generate a comfortable and enjoyable sense of being in the presence of a living person (2012).

OBJECTIVES
The primary goal of the present study was to show that an ecological and naturalistic paradigm
might be considered to investigate complex social interaction phenomenon in which a helping
behavior takes place and has to be assessed. To address difficulties regarding the control of multiple
independent variables and reproducibility of experiences in empirical research, Wilms and his
colleagues came to a conclusion that virtual agents offer an “experimental platform (which) allow

Copyright © 2015, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.

International Journal of Synthetic Emotions, 6(1), 60-73, January-June 2015 63

real-time, ‘online’ interactions between participants and the social stimuli while also providing
means for experimental control over changes of the social stimuli” (pg. 99, 2010). While this is
not, in our knowledge, the first attempt conducted with an affective agent involved in a complex
pragmatic situation to demonstrate how emotional parameters shape the participants’ subjective
interpretation (see Castellano et al., 2009; DeMelo, Celsom, Carnevale & Gratch, 2011; Hindriks
et al., 2012; der Ham, Broekens, & Roelofsma, 2014), this is an inaugural step toward the use
of this framework to assess psychiatric patient’s social cognition impairements. Indeed, virtual
reality has been successfully used in psychiatry (for example, virtual reality exposure therapy or
social skill learning in virtual environments) but not for assessment of patient’s social cognition
based on communicative intentions of a virtual agent.
Here we describe a paradigm that consists of a card-guessing game involving a female
virtual affective agent. The agent simulates an intentional human who expresses joy (suggesting
agreement to the right card to pick by the user), anger (suggesting disapprobation towards the
wrong card to pick) or neutral expression according to the cards she randomly receives. Thus,
she may either modulate her emotional expression to communicate an advice (positive and
negative valences) on the expected answer or adopt a non-communicative neutral expression.
Thanks to this procedure, positive and negative expressions are to be pragmatically interpreted
as a helpful cue in order to achieve the main goal. On the other hand, neutral expressions might
be interpreted as non-helpful cues allowing to vary the communicative intention on a game-turn
basis. Subjective experience after each trial was assessed to determine how helpful the subjects
considered positive, negative and neutral expressions. Helpfulness ratings were systematically
recorded and were followed by two variables of interest to monitor the subjects’ affective and
metacognitive status. Certainty ratings of the subjects about the correctness of their own last
answer were considered to determine if there were potential relationships between helpfulness
and self-monitoring (defined as metacognitive assessment by Koren et al., 2006). Hypothetically,
the game design would increase such a correlation because being helped was associated with
receiving a hint on the correct answer. Lastly, subjective assessments of sympathy were recorded
to control for the subject’s evaluation of non-intentional affective attitudes. Concerning this
variable, one could expect that the design would alleviate the correlations as negative emotions
were to be considered as valid messages and are helpful for succeeding in guessing the card.
As emphasized before, people with schizophrenia and/or with similar social cognitive
disorders present an inability to recognize facial expressions and intentions behind them. As
a consequence, communicative intentions regarding helpfulness and being sympathetic is difficult to be accessed by these patients. In this paper we propose that our card-guessing game
paradigm and virtual agents can provide a wider assessment of these impairments. In order to
use this paradigm with psychiatric patients, we aim to validate here our claim by testing whether
non-psychiatric subjects are able to interpret the virtual avatar’s intentions and modulate virtual
avatar’s helpfulness and sympathy ratings according the experimental conditions, as well as
their self-monitoring ratings.

EXPERIMENT
Subjects
Sixteen healthy volunteers (three males and thirteen females) participated in the study. All the
participants were above 18 and under 60 years-old (mean=32). They declared that they had never
being treated for a mental disorder nor they had followed antipsychotic medication. Participants
had normal or corrected-to-normal vision.
Copyright © 2015, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.

64 International Journal of Synthetic Emotions, 6(1), 60-73, January-June 2015

Stimuli
This study uses the Multimodal Affective and Reactive Characters (MARC) framework (Courgeon, Martin, & Jacquemin, 2008; Courgeon & Martin, 2009) to animate a real-time realistic
3D character. It is based on computational modeling of emotions (actions unit etc.) inspired
by the different approaches to emotion in Psychology. This platform has been used in various
kinds of applications: games, ubiquitous intelligence, virtual reality, therapeutic applications,
art, etc. The software architecture consists of three modules: the 3D animation software per se,
an offline editor of facial expressions and, an offline body animation editor. This real-time facial
animation platform is designed for perceptive evaluations of affective interaction. The validity
of the system has been established (Courgeon, Buisine & Martin, 2009) by empirical results
regarding the perception of basic and complex emotions as well as for different levels of these
expressions’ intensity (low versus full intensity). In this experiment, we used a female 3D-model
called Marie because this is one of the most frequent female surnames in France. The interaction with the agent during the task did not require a human supervisor to avoid interference on
the subjects’ answers.
A state machine was used to manage the interaction with the subjects. After each subject’s
move, the automaton determined the agent’s behavior for its next move, i.e. the facial expressions to display and the verbal statements, if any. Transitions between states were predetermined.
Non-prosodic speech synthesis was used and automatically synchronized with head/facial and
lips movements (Virginie voice, in French, Scansoft Inc.). The rate of the speech was set at the
default pace for all the participants.
Prior to the experiment, validation of emotion valence was performed using MARC. Twenty
healthy subjects had to look at Mary’s different basic and complex expressions (to see those,
please see Courgeon, Buisine & Martin, 2009) and, then, to classify the expressions as positive
or negative. Then we chose the most negative and positive rated expressions and asked them to
label it. This procedure showed that 89.9% of participants found an expression as being the most
positive and labeled it ‘joy’, while 98% of participants found another expression as being the
most negative and labeled it ‘anger’. We used these expressions for approbation and disagreement for suggesting the right or wrong card in order the win the game.
The built-in facial emotion editor was used to render dynamic emotions. The resulting facial
expressions were modeled as a set of actions units. Facial expressions were based on Facial
Action Coding System - FACS (Ekman and Friesen, 1978, Ekman, 2002). FACS is one of the
few models that describes and classifies characteristics of human facial expressions. They are
characterized by the activation of Action Units (AUs), each of them corresponding to the contraction of one or several facial muscles. Positive expression (see figure 1) recruited three AUs:
AU6 caused cheek raiser (orbicularis oculi, pars orbitalis contraction), AU11 caused nasolabial
deepener (zygomaticus minor contraction) and AU12 caused lip corner puller (zygomaticus major
contraction). Negative expression (see figure 2) recruited two AUs: AU4 caused brow lowerer
(corrugator supercilii, depressor supercilii contraction) and AU15 caused lip corner depressor
(depressor anguli contraction).

Procedure and Task
The experiment was carried out on a HP microcomputer (Intel(R) Core(™) i7-3630QM CPU @
2.40 GHz with 8.00Go RAM and NVIDIA Quadro K4000M GPU @ 600 MHz with 4.00Go RAM)
with a 22 screen with 1920*1080 screen resolution displayed with a refresh rate of 60Hz. The
MARC software was used to create and manage the experiment in fullscreen mode. In addition,

Copyright © 2015, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.

International Journal of Synthetic Emotions, 6(1), 60-73, January-June 2015 65

Figure 1. Screenshot of the card-game situation and of the virtual agent with positive expression

we stabilized the chair so that the subjects should center their gaze in the middle of the screen
and the distance between the subjects and the monitor remained constant (55 cm). This setting
provides a visual angle of 47.1 degrees for width and 27.6 degrees of height for overall screen.
Regarding the stimuli itself, the face of the 3D character appeared in the center of the screen and
provides a visual angle of 13.2 degrees for width and 10.8 degrees of height for each subject.
After the completion of the consent form, each subject was tested individually during a
session lasting approximately 30 min. It was explained to the subjects that they would be taking
part in an experiment in which they would play a chance game with a 3D character. It was also
explained to the subjects that this 3D character would explain itself the rules and the procedure
of the game.
The task in which the pragmatic context took place derives from a trust game in which the
participants have to guess the card to choose on the basis of the agent’s emotional expression.
First of all, the virtual agent enunciated the instructions to the participants that they were about
to play a card game with her. Importantly, no explicit instructions or advice about the communicative intentions of the agent were given to the subjects.
The experimental session consisted of 38 game turns (trials) following first two training
turns that are excluded from further analyses. Each trial was structured as depicted in Figure
3. Three cards were placed in front of the agent so that only she could see their black or red
color. The colors of the cards were randomized so that only one among the right or left cards
was color-matched with the central card. Having looked at the middle card, the agent looked at
the other two cards for two seconds, in a counterbalanced random order. The agent displayed
Copyright © 2015, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.

66 International Journal of Synthetic Emotions, 6(1), 60-73, January-June 2015

Figure 2. Screenshot of the card-game situation and of the virtual agent with negative expression

an emotion to one of these cards (for instance, either joy-approbation for the correct card, or
anger-disagreement for the wrong card) or did not display any emotion (neutral condition). Two
experimental factors were varied to determine the expression: “Valence” and “Intensity”. High
intensity corresponded to the full expression capabilities and low intensity to half expression
capabilities. In trials, always the same level of intensity was used for the both expressions. The
order of the trials was randomized and subjects were presented an equal number of emotional
expressions as well as neutral expressions. Neutral condition was considered as the zero expression level. Thus, experimental conditions allowed defining two independent variables, valence
(+1, 0 or -1) and intensity (0, .5 or 1), to be used as regressors.
After she had looked at right and left cards, Mary urged the participant to answer on a twobutton pad in order to select either the left or the right card. The participants had 5 seconds to
respond accordingly. Otherwise, Mary requested again an answer. Depending on the subject’s
answer, Mary either congratulated the subject or displayed sadness. After each trial, a pop-up
window opened to present the metacognition/social judgment questionnaire (see below).

Measures
Behavioral Measures
The subjects’ choices were recorded and coded either “correct” or “incorrect”. Their response
times were also recorded. Trials for which the subjects did not answer within the 5 seconds

Copyright © 2015, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.

International Journal of Synthetic Emotions, 6(1), 60-73, January-June 2015 67

Figure 3. Description of a single trial during the card game

time-window were excluded from further analyses. This is because the fact that in cognitive
psychology studies, it is acknowledge that if a subject’s reaction time is longer then the median
reaction time, the empirical probability of the link between a stimulus and behaviour is lesser.

Metacognition/Social Judgment Questionnaire
At the end of every trial (i.e. after the feedback of the agent on the correctness of the answer),
a questionnaire was displayed in order to explore the participant’s subjective experience during
the last turn:
•	
•	
•	

Helpfulness Degree: “To which extent did Mary help you?”
Sympathy Judgment: “To which extent did you find Mary sympathetic?”
Self-Monitoring: “To which extent were you sure of your response?”
Participants answered using a computer mouse on a slider representing a 0 to 100 scale.

Statistical Analyses
Considering the weak error rate of user’s answers (14%), and the different influences of success
versus failure on metacognitive judgments, only trials with correct answers leading to a positive
feedback from the agent were considered in the analyses.

Copyright © 2015, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.

68 International Journal of Synthetic Emotions, 6(1), 60-73, January-June 2015

The main analyses focused on subjective ratings to characterize their respective determinants.
Subjective judgments ratings were transformed using arcsin(sqrt(x)) (Sokal & Rohlf, 1995)
function, and were normalized within subjects in order to control for rating scale variability.
Two linear statistical analyses were performed with the subjective ratings as dependent
variables. First, coefficient of determination (r2) of the three couples of subjective ratings was
computed to provide an estimate of shared variance. Second, linear regression analyses were
performed with subjective ratings being predicted by valence, intensity, reaction time (in seconds),
and epoch (i.e. actual trial number divided by the total number of trials). Moreover, the amount
of variance explained by each regressor was computed using Feldman’s proportional marginal
variance decomposition (pmvd; Feldman, 2005) implemented within the software R relaimpo
package. With a 1000-runs bootstrapping procedure, pmvd values were used to compare the
relative importance of each regressor.

RESULTS
Behavioral Results
Correct answer rates and response times are reported in Table 1.

Dual Relationships between Subjective Ratings
Correlations between subjective ratings indicate significant (p<.05) positive linear relations
between the three ratings. Table 2 reports r2 values indicating, in particular, a large effect-size
for the relation between helpfulness and self-monitoring.

Predictors of Subjective Ratings
Subjective ratings were entered as dependant variables in linear multiple regressions analyses
(421 degrees of freedom). Table 3 reports the results of these analyses and additional information
on the quality of the models. Only regression models concerning helpfulness and self-monitoring
yielded significant prediction of variance (i.e. above 40%) with a similar pattern of estimated
coefficients. From the bootstrap analysis one observes that intensity was by far the best predictor
of these two variables, and valence consistently arrives at a second position. Worthy of note, is
the negative going coefficient of Response times on self-monitoring.

Table 1. Percentage of correct responses and standard errors in parentheses for each experimental
condition. 570 samples were considered for calculating Correct answer rates proportion. 426
samples survived the correct answer selection
Condition
(valence, intensity)

Correct answer rates

Response times (ms)
(only for correct answers)

Negative High

91% (28%)

501 (501)

Negative Low

78% (42%)

626 (495)

Neutral

44% (50%)

973 (808)

Positive Low

96% (21%)

579 (498)

Positive High

98% (14%)

570 (596)

Copyright © 2015, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.

International Journal of Synthetic Emotions, 6(1), 60-73, January-June 2015 69

Table 2. Coefficients of determination for the three post-trial subjective ratings. N=426 samples
r2

Helpfulness

Sympathy

Self-monitoring

Helpfulness

1

8%

56%

Sympathy

-

1

5%

Self-monitoring

-

-

1

Table 3. Regression analyses of helpfulness, sympathy and self-monitoring. Estimate column:
parameter estimates and significance codes for single regressors: ‘***’ p<0.001, ‘**’ p<0.01,
‘*’ p<0.05, ‘.’ p<0.1. Pmvd columns: proportion of variance explained by the predictor. When
possible, relative importance analyses determined the possible ranks for a regressor with respect
to the others, from A (first rank) to D (last rank). N=426 samples
Helpfulness

Sympathy

Self-monitoring

Estimate

Pmvd

Estimate

Pmvd

Estimate

Pmvd

Experiment
progress

.005

0% CD

.005 .

0%

.02 ***

3% CD

Valence

.32 ***

8% B

.15 ***

6%

.34 ***

10% B

Intensity

1.56 ***

36% A

.28 ***

3%

1.22 ***

25% A

Response
times (s)

-.12 *

2% CD

.01

0%

-.17 **

4% CD

Intercept

-.49 ***

-.58 ***

-.42 ***

Adjusted R
squared

48%

8%

43%

As helpfulness and self-monitoring had a very similar pattern, additional regression models
were performed by introducing sympathy as a regressor. Although this variable was modelled
as a significant predictor (parameter estimate=0.19, p<.005), the model was barely improved
(Adjusted R2=49%) and the associated pmvd importance value was only of 5%. Sympathy did
not contribute significantly to self-monitoring (parameter estimate=0.05, p=0.36).

DISCUSSION
The present work exemplifies the relevance of virtual affective agents for studying the factors
involved in high-level metacognitive and social judgments, and more specifically the feeling
of being helped by another person. Following a naturalistic approach of social cognition, a new
paradigm based on a card-guessing game was designed to urge the participants to make their
choices on the basis of the agent’s emotional displays. Playing the game required emotion recognition with varied intensities and valences, as well as understanding the agent’s cooperative
behavior and communicative intentions. The subjects had to integrate these different aspects in
order to evaluate both the agent’s attitudes and their own performances. The variability of the
subjective evaluations performed after each trial was investigated to determine their respective
determinants and to delineate the specific properties of others’ help assessment ratings.

Copyright © 2015, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.

70 International Journal of Synthetic Emotions, 6(1), 60-73, January-June 2015

In line with the objectives, investigation on higher helpfulness ratings allowed to draw the
panorama of the related variables. To begin with non-significant findings, response times and
the epoch in the experiment were not predictors of the helpfulness ratings (explained variance
is estimated under 5%). Concerning epoch, the findings suggest no time-drift in the ratings. The
subjects were prone to revise their judgment on the basis of the most recent events instead of
giving an integrative judgment. On the contrary, the best predictors concerned the emotional
displays of the virtual agent as shown by the substantial amount of variance explained by intensity and valence.
The intensity factor was introduced in the design to operationalize communicative intention. Some previous research have reported that facial expressions convey information about
the expresser’s emotional state as well as behavioral intentions or action requests directed at
an audience such as offensiveness (e.g., “back of or I will attack”) or appeasement, submission
(Fridlund, 1994, 1997; cited by Horstmann, 2003). According to Parkinson, “facial movements
can perform many communicative and pragmatic functions” according to an “on-line” appraisal
process in interpersonal interaction (2005, pg. 306). For example, when a subject observes
someone else’s facial expression, he/she might raise several hypotheses: for example, a smile
might reflect another’s inner state such as joy and/or a specific intention such as the agreement
with an action that is performed at the same moment. In agreement with the naturalistic claim,
in order to evaluate whether an expression represents an agent’s emotions, intentions or both,
one should also take into account other social cues (gesture, posture, speech utterance, etc.) and
the social situation in which the interaction occurs. As advocated by Ochsner, both the perception of social-affective stimuli and mental state inference are related constructs within the social
cognitive system (2008). The present results concur with these views as they demonstrate that the
subjects were particularly attentive to the presence of a message conveyed through facial emotions
when judging the agents helpful behavior. Let’s remind here that the analyses were restricted to
successful trials and that the subjects could also win with 50% chances in the absence of a cue.
Although they won a trial, the subjects did integrate the absence of a message into their more
negative helpfulness ratings. In other words, even in the case of a good performance, feeling the
help of another person requires detecting a causal action from him/her.
Another interesting determinant of helpfulness ratings was the valence of the agent’s expression. Although this factor only predicted 8% of the variance, the positive contribution (regression
coefficient > 0) appears understandable: 1) a positive emotion is obviously more attractive and
rewarding than a negative emotion; 2) positive emotions were less effortful as negative emotions required an additional inhibition of the choice corresponding to the direction of the agent’s
emotional-face. These two factors could not be disentangled in the present study, but appear
indicative of the partial relevance of expressing simple and positive emotional messages to be
considered as helpful. The additional regression analysis introducing sympathy as a predictor
did not change the pattern and did not invalidate this conclusion. Here again, the present work
quantifies to which extent expressing clear messages, as operationalized through various intensities, is more important than relying only on positive emotional expressions.
A last result from the present study concerns the shared variance reaching 56% observed
between helpfulness and self-monitoring. This metacognitive judgment exhibits a similar regression pattern among the predictors entered in the model, although the total explained variance
(43%) was lower than for helpfulness. This relation may be interpreted as the fact that having
recognized the agent’s helping behavior on the basis of her emotional communication is a prerequisite for being sure of the answer. Conversely, one could raise the hypothesis that reaching
a high degree of certitude while looking at the agent’s emotional face is highly evocative of
her helping intention. Whatever the direction of the causal relationship, the results reveal an

Copyright © 2015, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.

International Journal of Synthetic Emotions, 6(1), 60-73, January-June 2015 71

obvious convergence between the self-centered evaluation of performance and the understanding of another’s helping intention. As stated in the introduction, the pragmatic situation of a
card-guessing paradigm facilitated such a convergence, as the agent was the unique source of
information. Further experiments should be conducted with different sources of information (the
agent vs. another source) and varied reliabilities (i.e. imprecise or misleading sources, etc.) to find
out the subjects’ capability to propagate each parameter’s variance toward subjective variables.

CONCLUSION AND PERSPECTIVES
The present work aimed at proposing a new paradigm to investigate high-level subjective assessment related to the sense of being helped by another person and to self-monitoring metacognition. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time that a naturalistic interaction setting was
used to achieve measurements of these subjective variables while emotional parameters were
experimentally varied. Because this paradigm is now under investigation in clinical populations
(schizophrenia, etc.) for both evaluation and social cognitive remediation, it appeared of special
interest to provide some inaugural results about its’ relevance for eliciting complex interpretation
phenomenon. In addition, effect sizes reported here demonstrate that although some effects are
large, others are of small magnitude, and thus, should be investigated either with larger populations. Further researches might consider the use of virtual affective agents as a mean to analyze
patients-therapist relationships for that they combine better replicability and control over the
stimuli during dynamic, non-deterministic stimulation.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research was funded by a grant from the Agence Nationale de la Recherche: ANR-11EMCO-0007.

REFERENCES
Bazin, N., Passerieux, C., & Hardy-Baylé, M. C. (2010). ToMRemed: Une technique de remédiation cognitive centrée sur la théorie de l’esprit pour les patients schizophrènes. Journal de Thérapie Comportementale
et Cognitive, 20(1), 16–21. doi:10.1016/j.jtcc.2010.02.001
Callejas, Z., Griol, D., & López-Cózar, R. (2014). A framework for the assessment of synthetic personalities according to user perception. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 72(7), 567–583.
doi:10.1016/j.ijhcs.2014.02.002
Castellano, G., Pereira, A., Leite, I., Paiva, A., & McOwan, P. W. (2009). Detecting User Engagement
with a Robot Companion Using Task and Social Interaction-Based Features. Proceedings of International
Conference on Multimodal Interfaces and Workshop on Machine Learning for Multimodal Interaction
(ICMI-MLMI’09) (pp. 119-126), Cambridge, MA. ACM, New York, NY doi:10.1145/1647314.1647336
Courgeon, M., & Martin, J.-C. (2009). Impact of Expressive Wrinkles on Perception of a Virtual Character’s
Facial Expressions of Emotions. IVA.
Courgeon, M., Martin, J.-C., & Jacquemin, C. (2008). MARC: a Multimodal Affective and Reactive Character. 1st Workshop on Affective Interaction in Natural Environments, 12-16.

Copyright © 2015, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.

72 International Journal of Synthetic Emotions, 6(1), 60-73, January-June 2015

De Melo, C. M., Carnevale, P., & Gratch, J. (2011, May). The effect of expression of anger and happiness
in computer agents on negotiations with humans. In The 10th International Conference on Autonomous
Agents and Multiagent Systems-Volume 3 (pp. 937-944). International Foundation for Autonomous Agents
and Multiagent Systems.
Decety, J., Norman, G. J., Berntson, G. G., & Cacioppo, J. T. (2012). A neurobehavioral evolutionary perspective on the mechanisms underlying empathy. Progress in Neurobiology, 98(1), 38–48. doi:10.1016/j.
pneurobio.2012.05.001 PMID:22580447
Eack, S. M., Bahorik, A. L., McKnight, S. A., Hogarty, S. S., Greenwald, D. P., Newhill, C. E., & Minshew, N. J. et al. (2013). Commonalities in social and non-social cognitive impairments in adults with
autism spectrum disorder and schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Research, 148(1-3), 24–28. doi:10.1016/j.
schres.2013.05.013 PMID:23768814
Ekman, P. (2002). Facial action coding system. Salt Lake City: A Human Face.
Ekman, P., & Friesen, W. V. (1978). The facial action coding system. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press.
Feldman, B. (2005). Proportional Marginal Decomposition. Chicago: Prism Analytics.
Fett, A. K., Viechtbauer, W., Dominguez, M. D., Penn, D. L., van Os, J., & Krabbendam, L. (2011). The
relationship between neurocognition and social cognition with functional outcomes in schizophrenia: A metaanalysis. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 35(3), 573–588. doi:10.1016/j.neubiorev.2010.07.001
PMID:20620163
Fridlund, A. J. (1994). Human facial expression: An evolutionary view. San Diego, CA: Academic.
Gaudelus, B., & Franck, N. (2012). Troubles du traitement des informations faciales: le programme GAÏA.
In N. Franck (Ed.), La remédiation cognitive (pp. 169–181). Paris: Elsevier Masson.
Hindriks, K., Neerincx, M. A., & Vink, M. (2012). The icat as a natural interaction partner. In Advanced
agent technology (pp. 212–231). Springer Berlin Heidelberg. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-27216-5_14
Hojat, M., Gonnella, J. S., Nasca, T. J., Mangione, S., Vergare, M. J., & Magee, M. (2002). Physician Empathy: Definition, Components, Measurement, and Relationship to Gender and Specialty. The American
Journal of Psychiatry, 159(9), 1563–1569. doi:10.1176/appi.ajp.159.9.1563 PMID:12202278
Horstmann, G. (2003). What do facial expressions convey: Feeling states, behavioral intentions, or action
requests? Emotion (Washington, D.C.), 3(2), 150–166. doi:10.1037/1528-3542.3.2.150 PMID:12899416
Kim, M. G., & Suzuki, K. (2012). A card-playing humanoid playmate for human behavioral analysis.
Entertainment Computing, 3(4), 103–109. doi:10.1016/j.entcom.2012.03.002
Koren, D., Seidman, L. J., Goldsmith, M., & Harvey, P. D. (2006). Real-world cognitive--and metacognitive--dysfunction in schizophrenia: A new approach for measuring (and remediating) more “right stuff”.
Schizophrenia Bulletin, 32(2), 310–326. doi:10.1093/schbul/sbj035 PMID:16397202
Mercer, S. W., Maxwell, M., Heaney, D., & Watt, G. C. M. (2004). The consultation and relational empathy
(CARE) measure: Development and preliminary validation and reliability of an empathy-based consultation process measure. Family Practice, 21(6), 699–705. doi:10.1093/fampra/cmh621 PMID:15528286
Morrison, R. (2009). Empathy from Avatars: Propositions for improving trust development in pseudo-social
relationships with avatars. European Journal of Soil Science, 12(2), 298–309.
Neumann, M., Bensing, J., Mercer, S., Ernstmann, N., Ommen, O., & Pfaff, H. (2009). Analyzing the
“nature” and “specific effectiveness” of clinical empathy: A theoretical overview and contribution towards a theory-based research agenda. Patient Education and Counseling, 74(3), 339–346. doi:10.1016/j.
pec.2008.11.013 PMID:19124216

Copyright © 2015, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.

International Journal of Synthetic Emotions, 6(1), 60-73, January-June 2015 73

Ochsner, K. N. (2008). The social-emotional processing stream: Five core constructs and their translational potential for schizophrenia and beyond. Biological Psychiatry, 64(1), 48–61. doi:10.1016/j.biopsych.2008.04.024 PMID:18549876
Ortony, A. (2003). On making believable emotional agents believable. In R. Trappl, P. Petta, & S. Payr
(Eds.), Emotions in humans and artifacts. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Parkinson, B. (2005). Do facial movements express emotions or communicate motives? Personality and
Social Psychology Review, 9(4), 278–311. doi:10.1207/s15327957pspr0904_1 PMID:16223353
Peyroux, E., & Franck, N. (sous presse). Le programme RC2S: une prise en charge des troubles de la cognition sociale pour les personnes souffrant de schizophrénie ou d’un trouble apparenté. In N. Franck (Ed.),
Cognition sociale et schizophrénie. Paris: Elsevier Masson. doi:10.1016/B978-2-294-73927-9.00008-2
Schilbach, L., Timmermans, B., Reddy, V., Costall, A., Bente, G., Schlicht, T., & Vogaley, K. (2013). A
second-person neuroscience in interaction. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 36(4), 441–462. doi:10.1017/
S0140525X12002452 PMID:24049785
Simmons, R., Makatchev, M., Kirby, R., Lee, M., Fanaswala, I., Browning, B., & Sakr, M. et al. (2011).
Believable robot characters. AI Magazine, 32(4), 39–52.
Sokal, R. R., & Rohlf, F. J. (1995). Biometry: The principles and practice of statistics in biological research
(3rd ed.). New York: W.H. Freeman.
Van der Ham, W. F., Broekens, J., & Roelofsma, P. H. (2014). The Effect of Dominance Manipulation on
the Perception and Believability of an Emotional Expression. In Emotion Modeling (pp. 101–114). Springer
International Publishing. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-12973-0_6
Wilms, M., Schilbach, L., Pfeiffer, U., Bente, G., Fink, G. R., & Vogeley, K. (2010). It’s in your eyes — using
gaze-contingent stimuli to create truly interactive paradigms for social cognitive and affective neuroscience.
Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience, 5(1), 98–107. doi:10.1093/scan/nsq024 PMID:20223797

Copyright © 2015, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.

View publication stats

