InternatIonal Journal of
InformatIon and CommunICatIon
teChnology eduCatIon
October-December 2012, Vol. 8, No. 4

	
1
	
	

11
	
	
	
	
	
	

29
	
	

38
	

49

Table of Contents
Research Articles
Teacher Assessment of Young Children Learning with Technology in Early Childhood Education

Esther	Ntuli,	Department	of	Educational	Foundations,	Idaho	State	University,	Pocatello,	ID,	USA
Lydia	Kyei-Blankson,	Educational	Administration	and	Foundations	Department,	Illinois	State	University,	Normal,	IL,	USA

College Students’ Perceptions of Cell Phone Integration in Language Learning

Guoqiang	Cui,	Instructional	Design	and	Technology,	Virginia	Tech,	Blacksburg,	VA,	USA
Xin	Chen,	Instructional	Design	and	Technology,	Virginia	Tech,	Blacksburg,	VA,	USA
Wei	Li,	Instructional	Design	and	Technology,	Virginia	Tech,	Blacksburg,	VA,	USA
Shuyan	Wang,	Instructional	Technology,	University	of	Southern	Mississippi,	Hattiesburg,	MS,	USA
Zhenhuan	Yang,	Yantai	University,	Yantai,	China
Cuiqing	Meng,	Yantai	University,	Yantai,	China

ePortfolios and Technology: Customized for Careers

Eleanor	J.	Flanigan,	Department	of	Information	and	Operations	Management,	School	of	Business,	Montclair	State	University,	Upper
		Montclair,	NJ,	USA

Building Empathy in Online Courses: Effective Practical Approaches

Richard	G.	Fuller,	Department	of	Education	and	Graduate	Studies,	Robert	Morris	University,	Pittsburgh,	PA,	USA

Developing ITV Best Teaching Practices and Effective Professional Development Programs

	
	
	

Jared	Keengwe,	Department	of	Teaching	and	Learning,	University	of	North	Dakota,	Grandforks,	ND,	USA
Leslie	Ann	Bieber,	Prairieview	Special	Services,	Fairview,	MT,	USA
Gary	Schnellert,	Department	of	Educational	Leadership,	University	of	North	Dakota,	Grandforks,	ND,	USA

62

Graduate Students’ Perceptions and Experiences of Online Collaborative Learning in Web-Based and
Web-Supplemented Learning Environments

	
	
	
	

Jianxia	Du,	Faculty	of	Education,	University	of	Macau,	Macau,	China
Xun	Ge,	Department	of	Educational	Psychology,	University	of	Oklahoma,	Norman,	OK,	USA
Ke	Zhang,	Instructional	Technology,	Wayne	State	University,	Detroit,	MI,	USA

	
	
	

Nik	Thompson,	School	of	Information	Technology,	Murdoch	University,	Murdoch,	WA,	Australia
Tanya	Jane	McGill,	School	of	Information	Technology,	Murdoch	University,	Murdoch,	WA,	Australia

75

90
	

Affective Tutoring Systems: Enhancing e-Learning with the Emotional Awareness of a Human Tutor

Virtualization in Practice: Implementing Active Directory Sites

Eduardo	Correia,	Department	of	Computing,	Christchurch	Polytechnic	Institute	of	Technology,	Christchurch,	New	Zealand

105 E-Learning Perception and its Relationship with Demographic Variables: A Factor Analysis Approach
	
	

Deepak	Chawla,	International	Management	Institute,	New	Delhi,	India
Himanshu	Joshi,	International	Management	Institute,	New	Delhi,	India

International Journal of Information and Communication Technology Education, 8(4), 75-89, October-December 2012 75

Affective Tutoring Systems:

Enhancing e-Learning with the Emotional
Awareness of a Human Tutor
Nik Thompson, School of Information Technology, Murdoch University, Murdoch, WA,
Australia
Tanya Jane McGill, School of Information Technology, Murdoch University, Murdoch, WA,
Australia

ABSTRACT
This paper introduces the field of affective computing, and the benefits that can be realized by enhancing elearning applications with the ability to detect and respond to emotions experienced by the learner. Affective
computing has potential benefits for all areas of computing where the computer replaces or mediates face
to face communication. The particular relevance of affective computing to e-learning, due to the complex
interplay between emotions and the learning process, is considered along with the need for new theories
of learning that incorporate affect. Some of the potential means for inferring users’ affective state are also
reviewed. These can be broadly categorized into methods that involve the user’s input, and methods that
acquire the information independent of any user input. This latter category is of particular interest as these
approaches have the potential for more natural and unobtrusive implementation, and it includes techniques
such as analysis of vocal patterns, facial expressions or physiological state. The paper concludes with a
review of prominent affective tutoring systems and promotes future directions for e-learning that capitalize
on the strengths of affective computing.
Keywords:

Affective Computing, Affective Tutoring System, Cognitive-Affective Theory, E-Learning,
Intelligent Tutoring System, Learner Emotions

INTRODUCTION
Affective computing is defined as ‘computing
that relates to, arises from, or deliberately influences emotions’ (Picard, 1997, p. 3). Affective
computer interfaces improve human-computer
interaction by enabling the communication of
the user’s emotional state. While research in
human-computer interaction in the past had been
dominated by cognitive theories, the importance
DOI: 10.4018/jicte.2012100107

of users’ affective response is gaining attention
(e.g., Beale & Peter, 2008; Gratch & Marsella,
in press; Scherer, Banziger, & Roesch, 2010).
An important future step in interface design is to
incorporate the findings for the body of affective
computing research into interaction environments that enhance both cognitive performance
and personal comfort by providing the needed
emotional context (Maxwell, 2002). This is even
more relevant given the shift from the desktop
paradigm toward ubiquitous computing. As the
computing environment is steadily becoming

Copyright © 2012, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.

76 International Journal of Information and Communication Technology Education, 8(4), 75-89, October-December 2012

more tightly integrated with the day to day
physical world, developments in this area are
applicable to a vast array of situations such as
embedded applications, information appliances,
vehicles and so forth.
There is evidence that emotion has an
impact on the speed at which information is
processed (Öhman, 2001) and whether it is attended to (Anderson, 2001; Vuilleumier, 2001).
Emotion also has a relation to motivation in that
evaluations or feelings regarding the current
situation will largely determine the action that
is taken in response. Therefore, emotions are
often precursors of motivations (e.g., Oatley,
1992). Memory is also impacted by emotional
state, and again there are many mechanisms by
which this can occur. The Processing Efficiency
theory (Eysenck & Calvo, 1992) suggests that
emotions can utilize cognitive resources that
would otherwise be used for processing new
information; for example in the case of anxiety,
intrusive thoughts may compete with the cognitive task and result in a decrease in performance.
Thus, an area which can benefit greatly from
affective computing is education. The fact that
interaction with computers is a fundamental part
of study in most disciplines, coupled with the
cognitive and emotional journey that all learners
experience makes e-learning an ideal candidate
for affective computing developments.
Intelligent tutoring systems attempt to
emulate a human tutor by providing customized feedback or instruction to students. Whilst
intelligent tutoring systems remain an active
area of research, they have failed to achieve
widespread uptake. A reason for this is the technical difficulty inherent in building cognitive
models of learners and facilitating human-like
communications (Reeves, 1998). The difference
in learning performance between ideal one-toone tutoring conditions and other methods is
known as the 2 Sigma problem (Bloom, 1984).
Research on expert human tutors indicates that
‘expert human tutors devote at least as much
time and attention to the achievement of affective and emotional goals in tutoring, as they
do to the achievement of the sorts of cognitive
and informational goals that dominant and

characterize traditional computer based tutors’
(Lepper & Chabay, 1988, p. 242). Given the
apparent link between cognition and affect, it
may be argued that for an intelligent tutoring
system to emulate a human tutor successfully
there should be some consideration of affective
processes during learning. The inability of current intelligent tutoring systems to cater for the
role of emotion in learning may to some extent
explain the 2 Sigma problem in the context of
computer based learning. It is hoped that the
incorporation of affective components into
e-learning development may therefore lead
directly to improved pedagogical outcomes.
Providing this vital form of affective feedback
into intelligent tutoring and other applications
should greatly improve their success.

Cognitive Basis for Learning
The past few decades have seen the rise of the
personal computer to fill many varied roles as
organizer, communicator, entertainer and of
course, educator. Research in the area of learning has predominantly taken a cognitive view
in which the mental processes are considered as
they are involved in learning. Cognitive theory
is a learning theory of psychology that attempts
to explain human behavior by understanding the
thought processes. Cognitive theory is based on
the assumption that human beings are logical
and will make rational choices.
The field of cognitive psychology provides
explanations for many of the underlying mental
processes that occur during learning. Prominent in this field is the three stage information
processing model (Atkinson & Shiffrin, 1968)
shown in Figure 1. This multi-store model of
memory proposes that incoming information
from the environment is briefly captured in
sensory memory, and that information that is
interesting is more likely to go on from sensory
memory to short term memory. If a particular
piece of information needs to be retained, the
learner then makes a conscious decision to work
with it and to continue to process it. Information that the learner has deemed important is

Copyright © 2012, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.

International Journal of Information and Communication Technology Education, 8(4), 75-89, October-December 2012 77

Figure 1. Three stage information processing model (Atkinson & Shiffrin, 1968)

eventually encoded to the long term memory
for storage and later retrieval.
More recently constructivism has gained
ground; constructivists believe that learners’
reality is built upon their existing experiences
and perceptions. What someone knows is
grounded in perception of the physical and
social experiences which are comprehended by
the mind (Jonassen, 1991). However, in spite
of the way in which learning theories may have
evolved over time, they have shared the perspective that the human mind is viewed as an
information processing tool, not unlike basic
computer architecture.
Perkins highlighted the compatibility
between traditional cognitive theories and constructivism, stating ‘...information processing
models have spawned the computer model of the
mind as an information processor. Constructivism has added that this information processor
must be seen as not just shuffling data, but
wielding it flexibly during learning -- making
hypotheses, testing tentative interpretations,
and so on’ (Perkins, 1992, p. 51).
Cognitive theories however do not explain
the role that emotions play, in spite of the
substantial evidence that emotions influence
cognitive processes (Pekrun, 2008). Norman
(1981) cited the topic of emotion as one of the
major challenges to cognitive theory. Some
authors consider the information-processing
metaphor as the source of this challenge; for
example, Ortony, Collins and Clore (1990, p.
5) stated ‘This approach to cognition has been
as noticeable in its failure to make progress on
problems of affect as it has been for its success
in making progress on problems of cognition.’
People cannot be viewed purely as tasksolving, goal driven agents, they also have other
emotive reasons for their choices and behavior

that drive the decision making process (Mandler,
1975). Lisetti (1999) claims that a large number
of cognitive tasks are influenced by affective
state, including organization of memory, attention, perception and learning. The same
conclusion was reached by Picard (1997, p. x)
who states that ‘emotions play an essential role
in rational decision making, perception, learning and a variety of other cognitive functions’.

Cognitive-Affective Theory
Another important area of research considers the
underlying affective or emotional states and how
these interact with cognitive processes. The way
in which affective states interact with memory,
decision making and social behavior creates
a challenge for cognitive theory (Andrade &
May, 2004). Emotions may disrupt, slow down,
organize or initiate cognitive processes, and
different emotions can influence these mechanisms in different ways (Pekrun, 2002). There
has been a strong bias toward the cognitive and
rational within the field of computer science,
as a result of the prevailing view that the sciences are the domain of rules and logic with
little room for anything else (Picard, 1997). In
this view, emotion would be considered more
of a distraction than a benefit. This bias has
been reflected in the development of e-learning
software, as it would generally be developed by
programmers rather than learning theorists or
educators. Consequently, many of the benefits
of research into human affect and emotion are
not yet fully realized in e-learning software.
In the field of e-learning, a popular theory
describing how learners process and learn from
computer based multimedia is Mayer’s (2001)
Cognitive Theory of Multimedia Learning.
This theory draws from the multi-store model

Copyright © 2012, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.

78 International Journal of Information and Communication Technology Education, 8(4), 75-89, October-December 2012

Figure 2. Cognitive-affective theory of learning with media (Moreno, 2006)

of memory described above, and others, to
form a unified theory of the various aspects of
cognitive processing of multimedia content and
provides guidelines for instructional developers
to improve learning outcomes. Central to the
theory are the concepts that the human cognitive
processes include limited working capacity, dual
channels for various types of material (sound/
images) and that the information is actively
processed and assimilated by the learner (Mayer,
2001). Moreno (2006) extended this model to
include the role of affect in learning and named
it the Cognitive-Affective Theory of Learning
with Media (Figure 2). Where it differs from
the original model is in the inclusion of affective and motivational factors. This addition
acknowledges the role of affect as a mediator
for rational cognitive processes such as learning.
According to this theory, the level of interest that the learner has in the material will
correlate to learning benefits by influencing
students to invest more effort in the task. Furthermore, some instructional methods may be
more supportive than others therefore producing improved learning outcomes by improving
the student’s feelings about their ability to
complete the task (Moreno, 2006). The author
discusses the effect of emotions such as anxiety
or confidence, but this theory could potentially also apply to a wider range of more
subtle emotional expressions.
Cognitive psychologists are not the only
ones recognizing the link between emotion
and mental processes; emotion theorists have

long recognized that emotion itself may have
a cognitive component. Schacter and Singer
(1962) are known for their 2-factor theory in
which they argue that there is a cognitive determinant to emotion. Before this work, emotion
was believed to reflect biologically determined
responses, and this perspective evolved to
the view that emotion was a consequence of
cognitive process and that various external
factors determine the emotion that would be
felt (Andrade & May, 2004). What this implies is that cognition and emotion are deeply
intertwined, and that future developments in
affective applications must acknowledge the
two way interaction between these two basic
areas of human functioning.

The Role of Affect in Learning
Stein and Levine (1991) have identified a link
between a person’s goals and emotions, and
proposed a goal-directed, problem solving
model. As with other theories of emotion that
indicate that people like to maximize positive
affective states, their model assumes that people
attempt to assimilate information into their
existing knowledge – when this information
is new it results in arousal of the autonomic
nervous system – this, in conjunction with a
cognitive appraisal results in an emotional reaction. Therefore this model predicts that learning
always occurs during an emotional episode.
Kort, Reilly, and Picard (2001) have developed a model that links emotions and stages
of learning in a four quadrant spiral (Figure

Copyright © 2012, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.

International Journal of Information and Communication Technology Education, 8(4), 75-89, October-December 2012 79

Figure 3. Model relating phases of learning to emotions (Kort et al., 2001)

3). The learning process is broken up by two
axes, vertical and horizontal to signify learning
and affect. The learning axis contains labels to
indicate a range from constructive learning at
one end, to un-learning at the other. The affect
axis ranges from negative to positive. When a
learner is working through a task with ease, they
will be in quadrant I, experiencing constructive
learning and positive affect. As the material
becomes harder or if they struggle, they would
move through quadrants II, III, and finally IV
At this point they may be uncertain how to
progress, but as they acquire new insights and
ideas they will ultimately progress back to
quadrant I so that the spiral may continue as
they acquire more knowledge.
Goleman (1995) reported that expert teachers are able to recognize emotional states of
students, and respond appropriately to positively impact learning. Whilst the way in which
this is accomplished is not well documented,
and may indeed differ between teachers, the
foundation is still the same: to recognize negative affect or states that are detrimental to
learning and to guide the learner into a more
positive and constructive state. Csíkszentmi-

hályi (1990) described an ideal learning state,
which he called the zone of flow. In this state,
time and fatigue disappear as the learner is
absorbed and immersed in the task they are
undertaking. When in a state of flow, people
are absorbed in the activity and feel in control
of the task and environment (Hsu & Lu, 2004).
These characteristics of flow, are identical to
what players experience when immersed and
fully engaged in games (Chen, 2007), indeed
games which create a flow experience are
likely to be adopted, whilst others are discarded (Sherry, 2004). Thus educational games
may also benefit from this effect, as the engagement and enjoyment of the learner is a catalyst
to mediate their future learning and interest (Fu,
Su, & Yu, 2009).
Intelligent tutoring systems attempt to emulate the personalized instruction that a human
teacher may provide by building an internal
model of the students’ knowledge, abilities
and progress. An e-learning system with these
characteristics can have many advantages; for
example being always available and potentially
being able to provide more individual attention than in a traditional class based lesson.

Copyright © 2012, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.

80 International Journal of Information and Communication Technology Education, 8(4), 75-89, October-December 2012

Intelligent tutoring systems incorporating an
emotional or affective model are known as affective tutoring systems. An affective tutoring
system is thus any tutoring system that can adapt
to perceived emotion. This may be to respond
to any negative emotions being experienced
by the learner, or to interact in a manner that
is more natural and engaging for the learner.
These systems have also been shown to be
effective and result in increased learning (as
compared experimentally to a non-affect sensing implementation), however are still not as
effective as a one-to-one human tutor. Further
work is required.
For theories linking learning and affective
states to be implemented into the development
of affective tutoring systems an important consideration is the means by which the affective
state can be inferred by the computer. The next
section discusses the options that are available,
and this is followed by a review of affective
tutoring systems.

Inferring the Learner’s
Affective State
Given a suitable model to map affective states
to desired behaviors or outcomes, the (technological) challenge is how to detect or infer the
emotional state of the learner in the first place.
There are several approaches to this, each with
their own strengths and shortcomings.
One of the key issues surrounding the inference of affective state is the relationship between
the underlying emotion and the observable
expression or behavior which accompanies it.
Schachter (1962) argued that the differentiation
of emotion is not physical, but cognitive, and
the data does support the fact that various observable signals may be common to a multitude
of differing emotional states. Some signals are
better than others for differentiating affective
states, and one point which is agreed upon is
that no single signal is a sufficient indicator of
emotional response (Picard, 1997).
Affective states are internal and involve
cognitive processes and are therefore not directly accessible to anyone other than the one

experiencing them. Therefore it is only the
observable manifestation of the affective state
that may be used for the process of inference.
This is where the subtle, non-verbal indicators
of underlying affect become especially useful.
A further question is whether emotions may be
categorized into discrete states, or whether they
are dimensional constructs, which vary along a
continuum with several components. According
to discrete emotion theories, certain emotions
like happiness, fear, sadness or interest are
considered to be discrete, unique states that are
experienced as the result of distinct causes (e.g.,
Izard, 1977); many discrete emotion theories
share the idea that a specific set of emotions is
more basic or primary than the other emotions.
These emotions are related to action tendencies
and will thus have a physiological referent. In
dimensional models of emotions, it is assumed
that emotions can be represented in terms of a
number of component dimensions (e.g., Russell, 1980). This viewpoint has the benefit of
removing the need to categorize emotional
experience within pre-defined boundaries, and
may thus allow for a more fine-grained level
of description.

Self Report
A multitude of self-report measures have been
developed and used in research on mood and
emotion; many of these share similar features
but also differ in the way that the items are
formatted, the instructions used and variations
in the descriptive terminology applied. Many of
the most prominent affective measures involve
presenting lists of adjectives to the subjects,
and obtaining a rating on a 4 or 5 point scale
as to how appropriate or strong these particular emotions are. Examples include MAACL
(Zuckerman & Lubin, 1965), POMS (McNair,
1971), or PANAS (Watson, Clark, & Tellegan,
1988). Depending on the test in use, the questions may refer to the current day, previous week
or general overall emotional state.
More recently developed, the Current
Mood Questionnaire (CMQ) is a complex instrument that uses multiple response formats for

Copyright © 2012, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.

International Journal of Information and Communication Technology Education, 8(4), 75-89, October-December 2012 81

several dimensions of affect (Feldman-Barrett &
Russel, 1998; Yik, Russell, & Feldman-Barrett,
1999). Mood is assessed through several means:
1. simple adjectives rated on 5 point Likert
scale; 2. more complex mood statements rated
using an agree/disagree format; and 3. trait like
descriptions rated on a 4 point scale.
Although the CMQ is generally considered
to be internally consistent and reliable, and
results are satisfactory for the pleasantness/
unpleasantness dimension, the results are less
than satisfactory for the measures of arousal
or activation dimension. These problems are
not unique to the CMQ and it has also proven
difficult to create good measures of this dimension in other measuring instruments (Watson
& Vaidya, 2003). Overall, since the CMQ is
a rather time intensive method, it is not often
used as a practical affect measuring instrument.
The use of self-report also introduces some
specific challenges. In particular, since the subjects are being relied upon for their input, the
success of the measurement depends on them
being firstly aware of their own internal affective
experiences and secondly to be able to accurately
express these within the constraints of the assessment tool. The quality of self-report will
be directly related to the ability of the subjects
to accurately identify feelings, and for them to
be asked the right questions, at the right time
and in the best manner (Levenson, 1988). Due
to the subjective nature of these judgments it
can be argued that there is a considerable risk
of errors, even unintentional, when using this
method. Self-report measures are indeed subject
to both random and systematic measurement
errors (Coan & Allen, 2007).

Observable Traits
Emotions are said to produce ‘pervasive, although generally short-lived, changes in the
organism as a whole (Scherer, 1995, p. 235).
Thus, there are several aspects of emotional
expression that are observable. The use of
observations to infer the emotional state of an
individual stems largely from the work of Ekman and colleagues who theorized relationships
between particular facial configurations and

the underlying emotions present. The Ekman,
Friesen, and Tomkins Facial Affect Scoring
Technique (FAST) (1971) specified what they
believed to be the distinctive components of six
categories of affect expressions. This was based
on previous research and was highly theoretical
in nature. FAST, however could not be used
to determine whether facial actions other than
those specified are relevant to emotion. This
theory was developed into the more widely
known theory of ‘basic emotions’, in which
Ekman theorized that there are a set of basic
emotions (Ekman & Friesen, 1978). This theory
was developed further to derive lists of facial
expressions that would be used as markers for
these emotions.
Ekman and Friesen’s Facial Action Coding System (FACS) was designed to measure
all facial activity and not just actions related to
emotion (Ekman & Friesen, 1978). However
FACS is slow to learn and use and requires slow
motion viewing of facial actions. It is therefore
unsuitable for real time coding. A further issue
with all measures of emotions which use observations is that of independent validation – a
common approach in research is to ask subjects
to report their feelings (retrospectively) and see
whether the facial expressions differ from those
expected, this technique brings with it the issues
that are associated with the use of self-report
as an assessment tool.
Although less frequently studied, there are
other observable aspects of emotional expression. These include expressions such as posture
or vocalization. Empirical support for the ability
for listeners to successfully recognize emotional
state from vocal cues has been provided in
many studies spanning the last 50 years (e.g.,
Lieberman, 1961; Scherer, 1986; Williams,
1972). On average the reported accuracy is
around 60%, which is substantially better than
the (12%) result that would be obtained purely
by guessing.

Psychophysiology
Researchers have become increasingly aware
that a critical component of emotion is physiological activity. According to some theories,

Copyright © 2012, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.

82 International Journal of Information and Communication Technology Education, 8(4), 75-89, October-December 2012

if there is no physiological reaction there is
no emotion (e.g., Schachter & Singer, 1962).
Often a multi-modal approach is taken, with the
view that emotion involves a complex pattern
of responses, in which physiology plays a role.
This view is by no means a recent development; William James (1890) speculated that
patterns of physiological response could be
used to recognize emotion. It is theorized that
every psychological event or affective state
has some physiological referent (Cacioppo &
Tassinary, 1990); therefore the issue is not so
much of whether or not a physiological signal
is present, but rather which aspects of emotion
may be inferred from this signal.
There are vast arrays of physiological expressions which may be suitable for inferring
affective state; these include easily measurable
expressions such as muscle movement or breathing rate, to more subtle measures such as neural
activation of muscles, brain activity, skin conductance and cardiovascular measures. There is
empirical data linking patterns of physiological
response to specific affective states, however
results are mixed, and in some cases inconclusive (Cacioppo & Tassinary, 1990). Therefore,
the use of physiological measures brings with it
a rich and varied resource of information about
the individual, but possibly an equally substantial amount of data processing considerations
regarding how to interpret the data. However,
there are arguably many advantages to this approach. Physiological signals are unconscious
and do not carry any of the subjectivity of selfreport measures, furthermore they bring about
the potential for real time measurement with no
need to interrupt or otherwise distract the user.
Finally, as technology advances, physiological
sensors may be suitable for incorporating into
existing physical interfaces to ensure a more
natural interface which the user need not be
constantly aware of.

Affective Tutoring Systems
This section discusses the prominent affective
tutoring applications that have been developed.
The input mechanisms are discussed for each

system as well as the domain, and possible future directions and improvements are discussed
where appropriate.
AutoTutor is an intelligent tutoring system
that interacts with learners using natural language and helps them to construct explanations
in simulation environments (Graesser, McDaniel, & Jackson, 2007). The current version of
AutoTutor detects the learner’s affective state
using physiological and facial expression
analysis and conversational cues. The AutoTutor
focuses on a model of learner’s emotions that
includes emotions such as boredom, engagement, confusion or delight. The responses given
by the tutoring system are designed to regulate
the occurrence of any negative emotions in the
learner. Initial results indicate that the affective tutor improved learning (as compared to
a non-affective implementation of AutoTutor),
particularly for low domain knowledge learners
(D’Mello, Lehman, & Graesser, 2011).
Other projects have also examined the prediction of emotions using conversational cues
as opposed to physiological data. A successful
example involving use of dialogue features
is ITSPOKE (Litman & Silliman, 2004). ITSPOKE is a spoken dialogue system that uses
the Why2-Atlas physics tutoring system as its
back-end (VanLehn et al., 2002). The student
begins by typing in a natural language answer
to a physics problem, after which the ITSPOKE
system engages the student in a spoken dialogue to elicit more information and clear up
misconceptions.
In another project involving ITSPOKE,
Litman and Forbes-Riley (2004) used dialogue
features to predict human emotion in computerhuman tutoring dialogues, and to provide the
ability for the software to detect uncertainty on
the part of the learner and respond to address
this. Although no significant differences were
observed in metrics of student performance, the
automated emotion prediction did outperform
the baseline in all cases, however was not as
successful as emotion prediction by a human.
They did establish the utility of using acoustic
and lexical features to infer emotion, and this

Copyright © 2012, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.

International Journal of Information and Communication Technology Education, 8(4), 75-89, October-December 2012 83

may be beneficial for applications which utilize
this means of interaction.
Conati (2002) developed a probabilistic
model to monitor a user’s emotions and engagement during their interaction with educational
games. The model incorporates aspects of user
interface input and physiological markers to
estimate their emotional state. The dependencies
between emotional states and possible causes is
based on a cognitive model of emotions (Ortony
et al., 1990). The model relies on a dynamic
decision network to utilize indirect indicators of
the users’ emotional state. The goal being that
the model may be used by pedagogic agents to
guide the timing and type of interactions that
will occur with the user. To evaluate this model,
the Prime Climb educational game developed
at the University of British Columbia was used
as a test bed. The game helps students to learn
number factorization with a two player climbing
game in which players must solve factorization
problems to progress. The original game has a
pedagogical agent which provides hints when
prompted. The affective version of this game
utilizes the model of learner’s affect to guide
the actions of the agent and also to select the
appropriate affective expression to display.
When tested with year 6, 7, and 8 students the
authors found a significant difference in test
scores between the affective and non-affective
groups for the younger students, but did not
observe significant results with the older year
7 and 8 students. They attributed this partly to a
ceiling effect found whereby the older students
had already mastered the topic, but further investigation is needed to establish the causes. These
results are promising, given that the inference
of learners affect in this model is probabilistic
and based on the student’s progress in the game
– using a more direct measure of learner’s affect
would very likely yield a better classification
rate and potentially better outcomes.
Woolf, Burelson, and Arroyo (2007) have
developed several methods to evaluate students’ emotion using facial expression, skin
conductance, posture, and mouse pressure,
using Bayesian networks, not unlike the models
proposed by Conati (2002). A number of experi-

ments have been carried out to recognize and
respond to emotions in a learning context. In
one study, an on screen agent interacted with
the learner when frustration was detected. The
agent responded to frustration with empathetic
or task-support dialogue. Results demonstrated
that students became more motivated after
receiving the feedback. In a similar study by
some of the same authors, machine learning was
used to estimate the student’s engagement using
measures for student proficiency, motivation,
evidence of motivation and student’s response
to a problem. Their software used the measure
of the student’s engagement to predict the probability of a correct student response with up to
75% accuracy and showed that disengagement
negatively correlates with performance gain
(Johns & Woolf, 2006). In a further study Beal,
Arroyo, Woolf, Murray, and Walles (2004)
modeled student affective characteristics using
a mathematics tutor to guide the actions of the
software in terms of interaction and hints given.
Easy with Eve is an affect sensitive mathematics tutor developed by the Next Generation
Tutoring Systems project (Alexander, Sarrafzadeh, & Hill, 2006; Sarrafzadeh, Alexander,
Dadgostar, Fan, & Bigdeli, 2008) at Massey
University in New Zealand. Affect recognition is performed by video analysis to capture
facial expression and gesture information from
the user. The facial expression analysis builds
upon the work of Ekman and Friesen’s facial
action coding system where various ‘basic’
emotions are described in terms of their facial
movements. Facial features are extracted from
the video input and a fuzzy facial expression
classifier separates these into seven affective
states. The inferences made about the user’s
affective state from this data are then utilized
in a case based reasoning approach to dictate
responses and behaviors of the animated on
screen agent ‘Eve.’ The case based reasoning
is reported to be slow due to the large amounts
of data being processed; however the authors
identified that this is an issue which could be
addressed should the necessity arise.
Edu-Affe-Mikey is an affective tutoring
system that features an animated agent tutoring

Copyright © 2012, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.

84 International Journal of Information and Communication Technology Education, 8(4), 75-89, October-December 2012

in the domain of medicine. Affect inference is
done by processing input from the keyboard and
microphone. Human experts were consulted to
develop a list of events which signify changes
in learners’ emotional state. The occurrence of
these events is detected, and a simple weighted
average method is used to select the most likely
emotional state which would result from such
a combination of events. This information is
then used to select one of the pre-programmed
responses presented by the on screen animated
agent (Alepis, Virvou, & Kabassi, 2008).
Predinger, Dohi, Wang, Mayer, and
Ishizuka (2004) have developed an Empathic
Companion: an animated interface agent that
detects and responds to the user’s affective state.
The software uses physiological signals of skin
conductance and muscle movement to infer
the emotional state in terms of its component
dimensions. The agent is intended to address
the user’s emotional state by showing concern
in the form of empathic behavior. As one of
the aims is to make the interaction as natural
as possible, this affect recognition process is
done in real-time while the user is interacting
with the computer. The software application
is presented in the context of a job-application
interview scenario, where the affective agent
responds to emotions elicited by the interview
process. This physiological data is not constantly
processed; rather it is made available when
interface events request it, for example at the
end of each interview question. A Bayesian
network is employed to decide the most likely
emotional state based on the input data set and
to select from a number of pre-defined animation sequences to be presented by the Microsoft
Agent based on screen character. The study
carried out using this Empathic Companion had
some limitations. Due to technical limitations
of the ProComp+ physiological data acquisition hardware it was not possible to record and
process the physiological data simultaneously.
A workaround was put in place with a second
set of (non-identical) hardware. This technical
limitation also meant that muscle movement
sensing was not possible in the study, and this
was substituted for with a more basic measure

of heart rate. These issues with the hardware and
implementation of the experimental setup could
to some extent explain the lack of statistically
significant results from the study. However,
the authors also make a strong point that the
nature of the interview task may not induce the
kinds of emotions that can be measured by this
method. The authors suggest that an Empathic
Companion would be more suitable for use in
computer based education.

CONCLUSION
This paper has presented an overview of the
motivation for applying the benefits of affective
computing to e-learning. It has introduced the
field of affective computing, and the benefits
that can be realized by enhancing e-learning
applications with the ability to detect and respond to emotions experienced by the learner.
In order to understand the potential value of
affective computing for e-learning theories of
learning and the role of affect in learning have
been reviewed. Some of the potential means for
inferring the affective state of learners were also
considered. These can be broadly categorized
into methods that involve the user’s input, and
methods that acquire the information independent of any user input. This latter category is
of particular interest as these approaches have
the potential for more natural and unobtrusive
integration, and it includes techniques such as
analysis of vocal patterns, facial expressions or
physiological state. The paper also included a
review of prominent affective tutoring systems
that have been developed and discussed the approaches that have been taken in each of them.
The review of affective tutoring systems
has brought several things to light. Firstly, it
has highlighted that the approaches taken are
all diverse, down to the detail of which kind of
affective data is acquired, how it is processed,
interpreted and even how the affective tutoring system responds to this data. In fact, no
two systems reviewed are alike. Secondly, it
confirms that these systems are scarce. This is
in spite of the clear support for the role of affect

Copyright © 2012, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.

International Journal of Information and Communication Technology Education, 8(4), 75-89, October-December 2012 85

in learning that is provided by psychological
theories, and evident in the results of the evaluations of affective tutoring systems that have
been developed and tested to date. We believe
that these two observations are linked and that
the current requirement for ad-hoc development
in affective computing is hampering progress.
Allanson and Fairclough (2004) noted that
research in the area was disparate and uneven,
and it seems that little progress has been made
since then.
The application of affective computing to
learning, is a cross disciplinary area, drawing
from diverse fields such as computer science,
psychology and education. Thus, a successful
development either requires a developer to
possess expertise in several distinct areas, or
to have the support of a large research group.
This could contribute to the observed scarcity
of affective tutoring systems in the literature.
However, this requirement is not necessarily
a weakness, but may rather be turned to the
advantage of developers under the correct
conditions. What is required is to abstract the
functional components of an affective tutoring
system into a generalizable and re-usable model
which will allow developers to build upon their
successes iteratively and incrementally. Such a
framework or ‘blueprint’ for affective tutoring
systems, will also facilitate modularization of
solutions and allow separate groups to work on
different functional components within their
own area of expertise, thus eliminating the
above mentioned issue associated with such
cross disciplinary work. Further research is
required to develop this model.
In the short term, interface designers and
educators may still learn from the successes of
affective tutoring systems and draw from the
principles that were applied to their development. Educators should aspire to incorporate
some level of affective enhancement into any
educational applications. Even if the software
is unable to ‘read’ the emotional or cognitive
state of the learner, the evidence still stands that
learning benefits can be obtained by maximizing positive affect. Cognitive theories such as
Mayer’s cognitive theory of multimedia learn-

ing (Mayer, 2001) have received widespread interest from educators and multimedia designers,
and the application of cognitive principles to
any multimedia lesson has been shown to improve learning. This benefit is observed even in
software that does not possess an internal model
of the learner’s cognitive state (e.g., Thompson & McGill, 2008). In fact, these cognitive
principles may be treated like ‘best practices’
and successfully applied by the developers of
any educational materials. This is the era of
affect in computing, and the next logical step
is to develop affective theories of multimedia
learning, to provide similar guidelines for how
to present material in such a way as to maximize
positive affect. This will enable all instructional
developers to draw from the growing body of
affective computing knowledge, and translate
this into improved tutoring interfaces to the
benefit of the learners.
This is an exciting time for e-learning – the
worldwide e-learning sector generated $32.1
billion in 2010, and has been growing at 9.2%
per year over the last 5 years (Adkins, 2011).
This growth should not be perceived as pressure to move the same content from physical
to electronic delivery, but as an opportunity to
dramatically re-design educational materials
in line with these new insights into learning.
Innovations that bring improved educational
outcomes, whilst ensuring the scholastic, motivational and affective goals of the learner are
balanced in a supportive and natural learning
environment, should be embraced.

REFERENCES
Adkins, S. S. (2011). The worldwide market for
self-paced elearning products and services: 20102015 forecast and analysis. Monroe, WA: Ambient
Insight Research LLC.
Alepis, E., Virvou, M., & Kabassi, K. (2008).
Requirements analysis and design of an affective
bi-modal intelligent tutoring system: The case of
keyboard and microphone. In Virvou, M., & Jain,
L. C. (Eds.), Intelligent interactive systems in
knowledge-based environments. New York, NY:
Springer. doi:10.1007/978-3-540-77471-6_2

Copyright © 2012, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.

86 International Journal of Information and Communication Technology Education, 8(4), 75-89, October-December 2012

Alexander, S., Sarrafzadeh, A., & Hill, S. (2006).
Easy with Eve: A functional affective tutoring system.
In Proceedings of the 8th Workshop on Motivational
and Affective Issues in ITS (pp. 38-45).
Allanson, J., & Fairclough, S. H. (2004). A research
agenda for physiological computing. Interacting
with Computers, 16, 857–878. doi:10.1016/j.intcom.2004.08.001
Anderson, A. K. (2001). Lesions of the human
amygdala impair enhanced perception of emotionally salient events. Nature, 411(6835), 305–309.
doi:10.1038/35077083
Andrade, J., & May, J. (2004). Cognitive psychology.
Sheffield, UK: BIOS Scientific.
Atkinson, R. C., & Shiffrin, R. M. (1968). Human
memory: A proposed system and its control processes.
Oxford, UK: Academic Press. doi:10.1016/S00797421(08)60422-3
Beal, C. R., Arroyo, I., Woolf, B. P., Murray, T., &
Walles, R. (2004, August 30-September 3). Intelligent tutoring systems web-based intelligent multimedia tutoring for high stakes achievement tests.
In Proceedings of the 7th International Conference
on Intelligent Tutoring Systems, Macei, Alagoas,
Brazil (pp. 468-477).
Beale, R., & Peter, C. (2008). The role of affect and
emotion in HCI. In Christian, P., & Russell, B. (Eds.),
Affect and emotion in human-computer interaction
(pp. 1–11). Berlin, Germany: Springer-Verlag.
doi:10.1007/978-3-540-85099-1_1
Bloom, B. S. (1984). The 2 sigma problem: The
search for methods of group instruction as effective
as one-to-one tutoring. Educational Researcher,
13(6), 4–16.
Cacioppo, J. T., & Tassinary, L. G. (1990). Inferring psychological significance from physiological
signals. The American Psychologist, 45(1), 16–28.
doi:10.1037/0003-066X.45.1.16
Chen, J. (2007). Flow in games (and everything
else). Communications of the ACM, 50(4), 31–34.
doi:10.1145/1232743.1232769
Coan, J. A., & Allen, J. J. B. (Eds.). (2007). Handbook
of emotion elicitation and assessment. Oxford, UK:
Oxford University Press.
Conati, C. (2002). Probabilistic assessment
of user’s emotions in educational games. Applied Artificial Intelligence, 16(7-8), 555–575.
doi:10.1080/08839510290030390

Csíkszentmihályi, M. (1990). Flow: The psychology of optimal experience. New York, NY: Harper
and Row.
D’Mello, S., Lehman, B., & Graesser, A. (2011). A
motivationally supportive affect-sensitive AutoTutor. In Calvo, R. A., & D’Mello, S. K. (Eds.), New
perspectives on affect and learning technologies
(Vol. 3, pp. 113–126). New York, NY: Springer.
doi:10.1007/978-1-4419-9625-1_9
Ekman, P., & Friesen, W. (1978). Facial action
coding system: A technique for the measurement of
facial movement. Mountain View, CA: Consulting
Psychologists Press.
Ekman, P., Friesen, W., & Tomkins, S. S. (1971).
Facial affect scoring technique, (FAST) a first validity
study. Semiotica, 3(1), 37–38.
Eysenck, M. W., & Calvo, M. G. (1992). Anxiety and performance: The processing efficiency
theory. Cognition and Emotion, 6(6), 409–434.
doi:10.1080/02699939208409696
Feldman-Barrett, L., & Russel, J. A. (1998). Independence and bipolarity in the structure of current
affect. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
74(4), 967–984. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.74.4.967
Fu, F., Su, R., & Yu, S. (2009). EGameFlow: A
scale to measure learners’ enjoyment of e-learning
games. Computers & Education, 52(1), 101–112.
doi:10.1016/j.compedu.2008.07.004
Goleman, D. (1995). Emotional intelligence. New
York, NY: Bantam Books.
Graesser, A. C., McDaniel, B., & Jackson, G. T.
(2007). Autotutor holds conversations with learners
that are responsive to their cognitive and emotional
states. Educational Technology, 47, 19–22.
Gratch, J., & Marsella, S. (Eds.). (in press). Social
emotions in nature and artifact: Emotions in human
and human-computer interaction. New York, NY:
Oxford University Press.
Hsu, C.-L., & Lu, H.-P. (2004). Why do people play
on-line games? An extended TAM with social influences and flow experience. Information & Management, 41(7), 853–868. doi:10.1016/j.im.2003.08.014
Izard, C. (Ed.). (1977). Human emotions. New York,
NY: Plenum Press.
James, W. (1890). Principles of psychology. New
York, NY: Holt. doi:10.1037/11059-000

Copyright © 2012, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.

International Journal of Information and Communication Technology Education, 8(4), 75-89, October-December 2012 87

Johns, J., & Woolf, B. (2006). A dynamic mixture
model to detect student motivation and proficiency.
In Proceedings of Twenty-First National Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (pp. 163-168).

Maxwell, K. (2002). The maturation of HCI: Moving beyond usability toward holistic interaction. In
Carroll, J. M. (Ed.), Human-computer interaction
in the new millennium. New York, NY: ACM Press.

Jonassen, D. H. (1991). Objectivism versus constructivism: Do we need a new philosophical paradigm?
Educational Technology Research and Development,
39(3), 5–14. doi:10.1007/BF02296434

Mayer, R. (2001). Multimedia learning. Cambridge,
UK: Cambridge University Press. doi:10.1017/
CBO9781139164603

Kort, B., Reilly, R., & Picard, R. W. (2001, August
6-8). An affective model of interplay between
emotions and learning: Reengineering educational
pedagogy—Building a learning companion. In
Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference
on Advanced Learning Technologies, Madison, WI.
Lepper, M. R., & Chabay, R. W. (1988). Socialising
the intelligent tutor: Bringing empathy to computer
tutors. In Mandl, H., & Lesgold, A. (Eds.), Learning
issues for intelligent tutoring systems (pp. 242–257).
Berlin, Germany: Springer-Verlag. doi:10.1007/9781-4684-6350-7_10
Levenson, R. W. (1988). Emotion and the autonomic nervous system: A prospectus for research
on autonomic specificity Social psychophysiology
and emotion: Theory and clinical applications (pp.
17–42). Chichester, UK: John Wiley & Sons.
Lieberman, P. (1961). Some aspects of fundamental
frequency and emotional content in speech. The
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 33(11),
1677. doi:10.1121/1.1936731
Lisetti, C. L. (1999). A user model of emotioncognition. In Proceedings of the First Workshop on
Attitude, Personality, and Emotions in User-Adapted
Interaction of the International Conference on UserModeling, Banff, AB, Canada.
Litman, D. J., & Forbes-Riley, K. (2004). Predicting student emotions in computer-human tutoring
dialogues. In Proceedings of the 42nd Annual Meeting on Association for Computational Linguistics,
Barcelona, Spain.
Litman, D. J., & Silliman, S. (2004). ITSPOKE:
An intelligent tutoring spoken dialogue system. In
Proceedings of the Human Language Technology
Conference 4th Meeting of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, Boston, MA.
Mandler, G. (1975). Mind and emotion. New York,
NY: John Wiley & Sons.

McNair, D., Lorr, M., & Dropplemen, L. (1971).
Edits manual: Profile of mood states. San Diego,
CA: Educational and Industrial Testing Services.
Moreno, R. (2006). Does the modality principle
hold for different media? A test of the methodaffects-learning hypothesis. Journal of Computer
Assisted Learning, 22, 149–158. doi:10.1111/j.13652729.2006.00170.x
Moreno, R. (2006). When worked examples don’t
work. Is cognitive load theory at an impasse? Learning and Instruction, 16, 170–181. doi:10.1016/j.
learninstruc.2006.02.006
Norman, D. A. (1981). Twelve issues for cognitive science. In Norman, D. A. (Ed.), Perspectives
on cognitive science (pp. 265–295). Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Oatley, K. (1992). Best laid schemes: The psychology of emotions. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Öhman, A. (2001). Emotion drives attention: Detecting the snake in the grass. Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 130(3), 466–478.
Ortony, A., Clore, G. L., & Collins, A. (1990). The
cognitive structure of emotions. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Pekrun, R. (2002). Academic emotions in students’
self-regulated learning and achievement: A program
of qualitative and quantitative research. Educational Psychologist, 37(2), 91–105. doi:10.1207/
S15326985EP3702_4
Pekrun, R. (2008). The impact of emotions on learning and achievement: Towards a theory of cognitive/
motivational mediators. Applied Psychology, 41(4),
359–376. doi:10.1111/j.1464-0597.1992.tb00712.x
Perkins, D. N. (1992). Technology meets constructivism: Do they make a marriage? In Duffy, T. M.,
& Jonassen, D. H. (Eds.), Constructivism and the
technology of instruction (pp. 45–55). Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Picard, R. W. (1997). Affective computing. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Copyright © 2012, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.

88 International Journal of Information and Communication Technology Education, 8(4), 75-89, October-December 2012

Prendinger, H., Dohi, H., Wang, H., Mayer, S., &
Ishizuka, M. (2004). Empathic embodied interfaces:
Addressing users’ affective state. In E. André, L.
Dybkjær, W. Minker, & P. Heisterkamp (Eds.), Tutorial and Research Workshop on Affective Dialogue
Systems (LNCS 3068, pp. 53-64).
Reeves, T. (1998). The impact of media and technology in schools: A research report prepared for the Bertelsmann foundation. Retrieved from http://treeves.
coe.uga.edu//edit6900/BertelsmannReeves98.pdf
Russell, J. A. (1980). A circumplex model of affect.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 39(6),
1161–1178. doi:10.1037/h0077714
Sarrafzadeh, A., Alexander, S., Dadgostar, F., Fan,
C., & Bigdeli, A. (2008). How do you know that I
don’t understand’ A look at the future of intelligent
tutoring systems. Computers in Human Behavior,
24(4), 1342–1363. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2007.07.008
Schachter, S., & Singer, J. (1962). Cognitive, social,
and physiological determinants of emotional state.
Psychological Review, 69, 379–399. doi:10.1037/
h0046234
Scherer, K. R. (1986). Voice, stress and emotion. In
Trumbull, R., & Appley, M. H. (Eds.), Dynamics
of stress (pp. 159–181). New York, NY: Plenum.
doi:10.1007/978-1-4684-5122-1_9
Scherer, K. R. (1995). Expression of emotion in voice
and music. Journal of Voice, 9(3), 235. doi:10.1016/
S0892-1997(05)80231-0
Scherer, K. R., Banziger, T., & Roesch, E. (Eds.).
(2010). A blueprint for affective computing. Oxford,
UK: Oxford University Press.
Sherry, J. L. (2004). Flow and media enjoyment. Communication Theory, 14(4), 328–347.
doi:10.1111/j.1468-2885.2004.tb00318.x
Stein, N. L., & Levine, L. J. (1991). Making sense
out of emotion. In Kessen, W., Ortony, A., & Kraik,
F. (Eds.), Memories, thoughts, and emotions: Essays
in honor of George Mandler (pp. 295–322). Mahwah,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.

Thompson, N., & McGill, T. J. (2008). Multimedia
and cognition: Examining the effect of applying
cognitive principles to the design of instructional materials. Journal of Educational Computing Research,
39(2), 143–159. doi:10.2190/EC.39.2.c
VanLehn, K., Jordan, P. W., Ros, C. P., Bhembe, D.,
Bottner, M., Gaydos, A., et al. (2002). The architecture of Why2-Atlas: A coach for qualitative physics
essay writing. In Proceedings of the 6th International
Conference on Intelligent Tutoring Systems.
Vuilleumier, P. (2001). Beware and be aware:
Capture of spatial attention by fear-related stimuli in neglect. Neuroreport, 12(6), 1119–1122.
doi:10.1097/00001756-200105080-00014
Watson, D., Clark, L. A., & Tellegan, A. (1988).
Development and validation of brief measures of
positive and negative affect: The PANAS scales.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 54(6),
1063–1070. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.54.6.1063
Watson, D., & Vaidya, J. (2003). Mood measurement:
Current status and future directions. In Schinka, J.
A., & Velicer, W. F. (Eds.), Handbook of psychology: Research methods in psychology (Vol. 2, pp.
351–375). New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons.
doi:10.1002/0471264385.wei0214
Williams, C. E. (1972). Emotions and speech:
Some acoustical correlates. The Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America, 52(4b), 1238.
doi:10.1121/1.1913238
Woolf, B., Burelson, W., & Arroyo, I. (2007). Emotional intelligence for computer tutors. In Proceedings
of the 13th International Conference on Artificial
Intelligence in Education.
Yik, M. S. M., Russell, J., & Feldman-Barrett, L.
(1999). Structure of self-reported current affect: Integration and beyond. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 77(3), 600–619. doi:10.1037/00223514.77.3.600
Zuckerman, M., & Lubin, B. (1965). Manual for the
multiple affective adjective check list. San Diego, CA:
Educational and Industrial Testing Service.

Copyright © 2012, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.

International Journal of Information and Communication Technology Education, 8(4), 75-89, October-December 2012 89

Nik Thompson is a Lecturer in Information Technology at Murdoch University. He is completing a PhD at Murdoch University in Western Australia in the area of Affective Computing. His
research interests include e-learning, physiological computing and the development of adaptive
computer interfaces that detect and respond to the emotional state of the user.
Tanya Jane McGill is an Associate Professor in Information Technology at Murdoch University
in Western Australia. She has a PhD from Murdoch University. Her major research interests
include e-learning, ICT education, and information security. Her work has appeared in various
journals including Computers & Education, Decision Support Systems, Journal of Computer
Assisted Learning, Behaviour and Information Technology, and Journal of Organizational and
End User Computing.

Copyright © 2012, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.

