Oehl, M., Siebert, F. W., Tews, T.-K., Höger, R., & Pfister, H.-R. (2011). Improving Human-Machine Interaction – A Non-Invasive
Approach to Detect Emotions in Car Drivers. In J. A. Jacko (Ed.), Human-Computer Interaction, Part III, HCII 2011, LNCS 6763 (pp.
577-585). Heidelberg, Germany: Springer.

Improving Human-Machine Interaction – A NonInvasive Approach to Detect Emotions in Car Drivers
Michael Oehl, Felix W. Siebert, Tessa-Karina Tews, Rainer Höger, & HansRüdiger Pfister
Leuphana University of Lüneburg, Institute of Experimental Industrial Psychology,
Wilschenbrucher Weg 84a, 21335 Lüneburg, Germany
{oehl, fsiebert, tews, hoeger, pfister}@uni.leuphana.de

Abstract. As cars become increasingly computerized, automatic emotion
detection and affective computing provides a promising basis for futureoriented human-computer interaction (HCI) in cars. However, we are still
facing severe problems when trying to detect the users’ emotional state reliably.
This experimental study investigated grip-strength as a new non-invasive
method to detect emotions directly in an automobile context. A positive
emotion (happiness) and a negative emotion (anger) were examined regarding
their influence on grip-strength applied to the steering wheel. Results confirmed
and extended preliminary findings: Drivers’ grip-strength slightly increased
while driving a car when happiness was experienced and especially decreased
when anger was experienced. Implications for further research as well as for
praxis are outlined.
Keywords: Emotion detection in cars, human-computer interaction, humancentered design, affective computing.

1 Introduction
Human factors are the main reasons of traffic accidents probably not only in the
European Union [1]. To counter this, politics focused on improving safety measures
that are implemented in the traffic surroundings, e.g., guard railing, while car
manufacturers improved passenger protection. Albeit these improvements, research
still suggests that emotions are a main cause for maladjusted driving that leads to
accidents [e.g., 2, 3, 4]. Therefore, emotions are an important object of applied human
factors research aiming at an optimized human-machine interaction. However, while
there has been much progress in the research of the relation between especially
negative emotions, e.g., anger, maladjusted driving, and accident risk; little attention
has been paid to the detection of drivers’ emotions in cars. Therefore, the focus of this
experimental study lies on the detection of emotions in automobile drivers.
As cars become increasingly computerized, automatic emotion detection and
affective computing provides a promising basis for future-oriented human-computer
interaction (HCI) in cars. While other driver states, such as sleepiness and fatigue can
be reliably detected in cars, researchers and manufacturers are still facing severe
problems when trying to detect the users’ emotional state reliably. Our current study

faces this crucial question especially in an automobile HCI context. So the focus of
this experimental study lies on the automatic detection of emotions in car drivers
following a promising multimodal approach. Since the methods used to detect
emotions needed to be applicable in a car, we have only chosen non-invasive
measurements that do not interfere with the drivers’ ability to control the car, and are
in part already implemented in today’s state of the art cars. Earlier studies tried to
detect emotions in general with a number of non-invasive measurements, e.g., speech
[e.g., 5] and facial expressions [e.g., 6].
1.1 Detecting Driver’s Emotions
Taking into account the results of Mesken et al. [3], we focused on methods that
can be measured constantly and show enough variance, to allow discrimination
between different emotions. In Mesken’s study participants’ facial expression only
corresponded with happiness, while anger and anxiety corresponded with a neutral
face. Furthermore, Eyben et al. [7] suggest that speech does not occur constantly and
that there are emotional states, in which a driver will not talk at all. Hence these
limitations of the variables facial expression and speech, a new measure – gripstrength – was applied and evaluated in this current experimental study.
The driver’s grip-strength applied to the steering wheel can constantly be
measured, and a pilot study [8] showed variance in grip-strength that allowed
discriminating between different emotional states. As additional non-invasive
measurements, sitting posture and variation in the accelerator pedal were recorded.
The sitting posture of drivers is a promising measure to detect different emotions.
Overbeeke, Vink and Cheung [9] suggest that distinguishing emotions through
analyzing macro movements of seated humans could be possible. Variation in the
position of the accelerator pedal has been linked to high mental workload [10], and
could therefore correspond with high emotional arousal. Due to the novelty of the
measurement of emotion detection by grip-strength in an automobile context, we will
focus on this variable in this paper.
Since there is no data to support the claim that only a certain valence (positive or
negative) of emotions leads to maladjusted driving, we have chosen happiness as a
prototypical positive emotion, and anger as a prototypical negative emotion to be
induced in our experiment. Moreover, these two emotions are experienced very
frequently by drivers in traffic [3, 11, 12]. We classified emotions following the
approach of Scherer’s multi-dimensional emotion-space [13]. Scherer suggests that
emotions can be classified by two dimensions, i.e., valence and arousal. Anger and
happiness rate high on arousal, while anger ranks negative, and happiness ranks
positive on the valence dimension. This allows us to evaluate the grip-strength as a
measure to distinguish between different emotional valences.
Earlier studies on grip-strength and emotions showed an increase in grip-strength
when comparing a neutral drive with an emotional drive [8, 14]. Furthermore results
indicated that gender influences the grip-strength reaction [15]. Compared to male
participants female participants’ grip-strength increased stronger for happiness, while
male participants’ showed a higher increase in grip-strength compared to female
participants when anger was induced. In the anger condition female participants’ grip-

strength even decreased compared to the neutral condition. These new findings asked
for further research.
So our current study focused on evaluating as well as on extending these
preliminary findings with more participants, since the pilot study [8, 15] only had a
sample size of N = 21. Furthermore, the method for inducing emotions was changed,
to achieve better accuracy in the self-reported emotion questionnaire.
The two central research questions addressed in our current experimental study are:
1) Is it possible to detect emotions by driver’s grip-strength applied to the steering
wheel as a new additional non-invasive measure to detect emotions in an automobile?
2) Is it possible to differentiate emotions that rank different on the dimension of
valence but have an equal arousal level?

2 Method
This current experiment was based on a one-factorial design with repeated
measurements. The independent variable was the induced emotion in the driver. The
induction was between-subjects three-tiered in neutral vs. anger vs. happiness. The
dependent variable was drivers’ grip-strength applied to the steering wheel.
In the first part of this paragraph, we will explain the procedure of our study. After
this, the method to induce emotions is presented in further detail. At the end of this
paragraph, the measurement of grip-strength is outlined.

Fig. 1. Experimental procedure and setting in the driving simulator.

Participants (N = 59; 40 female) at the age of M = 23.39 years (SD = 4.51) were
asked to drive predefined routes in a driving-simulator STISIM DRIVETM 2.0 (Fig.
1). The routes consisted of country roads, city roads as well as highways and there
was sparse oncoming traffic. The design of the routes was modeled after real life
traffic-routes, to ensure high validity. Every participant drove a practice route to get
used to the driving simulator. After this practice route, the two experimental routes
followed in repeated measurements for the dependent variable. The first experimental
road was without induced emotions, i.e., the neutral route. The second experimental
route was with induced emotions, i.e., the emotional route (Fig. 1).
After participants finished the neutral route they were shown a film clip to induce a

specific target emotion. The method of induction is explained later in this paragraph.
Following this, participants drove the second experimental route, i.e., the emotional
route. The first neutral and the second emotional experimental route were identical,
but this time the surroundings of the road and the appearance of the cars on the road
were changed in order to leave participants unaware that they were driving on the
same route as before.
In this experiment we induced emotions as the independent variable. Participants
were randomly assigned to three different experimental groups, labeled according to
the induced emotions anger, happiness, and neutral. The neutral group without
induced emotion served as a baseline for the dependent variable grip-strength as well
as for the control of sequence effects due to repeated measurements. Anger and
happiness were chosen due to their high occurrence in traffic [3, 11, 12]. Emotions
were induced through films in this experiment, an efficient method to elicit defined
target emotions [16]. We used up-to-date evaluated clips out of film sets which were
specific for and ranked highest on the intended target emotion. The stimulus material,
i.e., the film clips, was as follows: ‘Hannah and her Sisters’ (neutral) and ‘When
Harry met Sally’ (happiness / amusement) [17] as well as ‘Schindler’s List’ (anger)
[18]. We evaluated the induction of emotions in pre-tests. Additionally, we applied
the Self-Assessment Manikin (SAM) as a non-verbal pictorial assessment technique
to measure participants’ affective reactions [19, 20].

Fig. 2. Schematic structure of the grip-strength sensitive steering wheel (KOSTAL Group).

As dependent variable served the driver’s grip-strength applied to the steering
wheel as a new measure to detect driver’s emotions in an automobile environment. To

measure grip-strength in this experiment, we used a unique steering wheel provided
by the KOSTAL Group. The steering wheel had a built in fiber that measured
deformation caused by force applied on the steering wheel by participants’ hands.
Forces were measured all around the steering wheel, giving a unit-less indication for
the applied grip-strength. Figure 2 shows the schematic structure of the steering
wheel. On the upper left a cross section of the steering wheel is shown while no
pressure is applied. On the bottom left the same structure is shown with applied
pressure. The upper right shows a single fiber that is used to measure the gripstrength. On the bottom right, the alignment of multiple fibers is shown within the
steering wheel.

3 Results
With regard to the Self-Assessment Manikin (SAM) as a non-verbal pictorial
assessment technique to measure participants’ affective reactions especially the
valence of affective reactions is of interest to distinguish between positive and
negative emotional states. For the first drive, i.e., the neutral route, participants across
all experimental conditions reported no significant differences for the valence of
emotional states (F(2,55) = 2.06; p > .05). But for the second emotional route after the
target emotion was induced through films we observed a significant difference of the
reported valence (F(2,54) = 3.37; p < .05). Compared to the neutral route the ratings for
the emotional route in the neutral condition were on a ten-points-scale M = 6.55
(+0.00; SD = 1.38), in the happiness condition M = 6.09 (+0.25; SD = 1.13), and in
the anger condition M = 5.41 (-0.59; SD = 6.00). This indicates by trend an effective
emotion induction and a carry-over effect of the target emotion in the films for the
emotional routes.
Due to technical dropouts we included n = 55 participants in the further analyses of
the grip-strength data. Based on the unit-less measurement of the grip-strength in our
experimental study and additionally due to the large differences in applied gripstrength between participants, especially the relative change of grip-strength within
subjects (neutral vs. emotional route) is of interest (Fig. 3).
Participants in the neutral condition (n = 20) showed some change in grip-strength,
comparing the neutral route to the emotional route. During the neutral route, the
average grip-strength was M = 1,133.96 (SD = 760.60) while during the emotional
route it was M = 1,195.44 (SD = 855.84). This is an increase of M = 61.48 or 4.25%.
To find possible effects of sequence due to repeated measurements, it is additionally
important to analyze the grip-strength of the neutral group (neutral vs. emotional
route) in this regard. If there would have been signs of fatigue for example, they
would have shown in the data as a decrease in grip-strength. Results suggest that there
is no effect of sequence, since there is a small but non-significant increase in gripstrength in the neutral group (t(19) = -1.25; p > .05).
The happiness condition (n = 18) showed a small but non-significant increase in
grip-strength (t(17) = -0.49; p > .05) as well. In the neutral route the average gripstrength was M = 889.71 (SD = 674.61) and in the emotional route it was M = 905.76
(SD = 666.01). This is an increase of approximately M = 16.04 or 2.16% in grip-

Grip-Strength Difference

strength.
In the anger condition (n = 17) a decrease in average grip-strength within the
participants (t(16) = 1.73; p = .051) just failed to be significant. During the neutral
route their average grip-strength was M = 1,024.12 (SD = 582.49) and during the
emotional route they applied a grip-strength of M = 961.32 (SD = 593.36). This
equals a decrease in grip-strength of M = -62.80 or approximately -5.82%. These
results are shown in figure 3.
A comparison of the changes in grip-strength (neutral vs. emotional route) across
the experimental conditions failed to be significant (F(2,52) = 2.33; p = .11).
Nevertheless, a direct comparison of the grip-strength changes between the neutral
and the anger condition yielded a significant difference (t(35) = 1.97; p < .05).
Further analysis of the data suggested that there were no significant differences in
the applied grip-strength between men and women in this experiment for the
experimental conditions (F(1,49) = 0.59; p > .05) nor any significant interaction of
gender and experimental condition (F(2,49) = 0.23; p > .05).

100.00
]

]

0.00

]

-100 .00

Neutral

Happiness

A nger

Emotional Condition
Fig. 3. Mean differences and confidence intervals in grip-strength (neutral vs. emotional route)
for the three experimental emotional conditions (neutral, happiness, and anger).

4 Conclusions
So far little attention has been paid to the applied automatic detection of drivers’
emotions in cars. Researchers and manufacturers are still facing severe problems
when trying to detect the users’ emotional state reliably. Therefore, this experimental
study focused on the automatic detection of emotions in automobile drivers especially
with non-invasive measurements applicable in a car and which do not interfere with
the drivers’ ability to control the car.
Due to the novelty of the measurement of emotion detection by grip-strength in an
automobile context, we focused on this variable in the current paper. Previous studies
on grip-strength and emotions showed an increase in grip-strength when comparing a
neutral drive with an emotional drive [8, 14]. Furthermore, results indicated that
gender influences the grip-strength reaction [15]. The results of our current
experimental study contrasted and extended these preliminary findings.
Our first research question asked if it was possible to detect emotions by drivers’
grip-strength applied to the steering wheel as a new additional non-invasive measure
to detect drivers’ emotions in an automobile. Our results suggest that grip-strength
can contribute to the detection of emotion. This has to be discussed with respect to
our second research question, i.e., if it was possible to differentiate emotions that rank
different on the dimension of valence but that have equal arousal levels (happiness vs.
anger). Grip-strength measures were slightly but not significantly increased for the
happiness group. We observed a comparable increase as well for the neutral
condition. However, we found a significant decrease in grip-strength for the anger
condition. Since we have neither found any gender differences in grip-strength across
the three experimental emotional conditions in the current experimental study nor any
differences in the general grip-strength applied to the steering wheel in contrast to
previous research [15, 21], our current results with a larger sample are consistent by
trend with the female participants’ results in our pilot study [15].
These findings suggest that grip-strength can help to differentiate between a nonemotional state of the driver and a critical emotional state like anger. Since critical
emotional states lead to maladjusted driving, this differentiation could help in
preventing accidents. Nevertheless, we are still facing open research questions, i.e.,
why is grip-strength deceasing for anger and not for happiness albeit these two
emotional states are both associated with high physiological arousal? In this respect a
video-based motion tracking of the driver and thus an activity analysis could be
insightful [22]. Drivers experiencing anger may have a higher variability of their hand
movements and might not stick constantly to the steering wheel. Additionally, an
evaluation of drivers’ grip-strength behavior with low-arousal emotions of different
valence as well as in real life scenarios is needed.
For future research it is also important to refine the measurement of grip-strength.
The steering-wheel provided to us, was a unique prototype. Therefore fine-tuning in
the algorithm of the calculation of grip-strength may be possible.
Taking into account the results of this study, additional non-invasive measurements
to detect drivers’ emotions should be considered in order to frame an applied humancentered HCI approach of emotion detection in cars. For example facial expressions
have shown to be quite useful for the detection of drivers’ happiness but rather
difficult for the detection of anger [3]. Besides, other promising new measures like

sitting posture and variation in the accelerator pedal should be considered as well.
Our current results showed that grip-strength can contribute to a more valid
detection of emotions of car drivers within a multimodal approach. In its application
in cars this research could lead to a more human-centered design of HCI in terms of
affective computing, e.g., adaptive advanced driver assistance systems (ADAS)
depending on the emotional state of the driver and thereby increasing safety to traffic
as well as increasing the driver’s comfort by regulating his emotional state. Also the
implementation of our method of detection would be simple and feasible, since the
bigger part of the necessary technology is already available in state of the art
automobiles. The ADAS may be realized within a multi-methodic system, taking into
account additional non-invasive measures, e.g., facial expressions or speech, thereby
increasing the validity of the emotion detection.

Acknowledgments. This research was funded by grant FS-Nr. 2006.63 from the
‘Arbeitsgruppe Innovative Projekte’ (AGIP) of the Ministry of Science and Culture,
Lower Saxony, Germany. We would like to thank the Volkswagen Group (Group
Research Electronics and Vehicle Research / HMI and Human Factors) as well as the
KOSTAL Group for technical support. Many thanks go to Patricia Brunkow, Johanna
von Stebut, Raphael Seitz, Christoph Ruth and Marco Wiethof for their help in
conducting the experiment as well as to Heiko Witthöft for his help in analyzing the
experiment and his support in applied computer science.

References
1. European Commission: White paper-European transport policy for 2010: time to decide.
Office for Official Publications of the Europe Communities, Luxemburg (2010)
2. Deffenbacher, J.L., Oetting, E.R., Lynch, R.S.: Development of a driving anger scale.
Psychological Reports 74, 83--91 (1994)
3. Mesken, J., Hagenzieker, M.P., Rothengatter, T., De Waard, D.: Frequency, determinants,
and consequences of different drivers' emotions: An on-the-road study using self-reports,
(observed) behaviour, and physiology. Transportation Research Part F 10, 458--475 (2007)
4. Nesbit, S.M., Conger, J.C., Conger, A.J.: A quantitative review of the relationship between
anger and aggressive driving. Aggression and Violent Behavior 12(2), 156--176 (2007)
5. Scherer, K.R., Johnstone, T., Klasmeyer, G.: Vocal expression of emotion. In: Davidson,
R.J., Goldsmith, H., Scherer, K.R. (eds.), Handbook of affective sciences, pp. 433-456.
Oxford University Press, Oxford (2003)
6. Cohn, J.F., Ekman, P.: Measuring facial action. In: Harrigan, J.A., Rosenthal, R., Scherer,
K.R. (eds.), The new handbook of methods in nonverbal behavior research, pp. 9-64. Oxford
University Press, New York (2005)
7. Eyben, F., Wöllmer, M., Poitschke, T., Schuller, B., Blaschke, C., Färber, B., NguyenThien, N.: Emotion on the Road - Necessity, Acceptance, and Feasibility of Affective
Computing in the Car. Advances in Human Computer Interaction (AHCI), Special Issue on
Emotion-Aware Natural Interaction, vol. 2010, 17 pages, http://www.hindawi.com/journals/
ahci/2010/263593.html (2010)
8. Siebert, F.W., Oehl, M., Pfister, H.-R.: The Measurement of Grip-Strength in Automobiles:
A New Approach to Detect Driver’s Emotions. In: Karwowski, W., Salvendy, G. (eds.),

Advances in Human Factors, Ergonomics, and Safety in Manufacturing and Service
Industries, pp. 775-783. CRC Press - Taylor & Francis, Boca Raton (2010)
9. Overbeeke, K.J., Vink, P., Cheung, F.K.: The emotion-aware office chair. In: Helander,
Khalid, Tam (eds.), Proceedings of the Int. Conference on Affective Human Factors Design,
pp.262-267. Asean Academic Press, London (2001)
10.Rakauskas, M.E., Gugerty, L.J., Ward, N.J.: Effects of naturalistic cell phone conversations
on driving performance. Journal of Safety Research 35, 453--464 (2004)
11.Levelt, P.B.M.: Praktijkstudie naar emoties in het verkeer [Emotions in Traffic]. SWOV
Report R-2003-08. SWOV, Leidschendam, Netherlands (2003)
12.Oehl, M., Roidl, E., Frehse, B., Suhr, J., Siebert, F.W., Pfister, H.-R., Höger, R.: Das
Emotionsspektrum von Autofahrern im Straßenverkehr [The emotional spectrum of car
drivers in traffic]. In: Petermann, F., Koglin, U. (eds.), 47. Kongress der Deutschen
Gesellschaft für Psychologie, Abstracts, pp. 371-372. Pabst Science Publishers, Lengerich
(2010)
13.Scherer, K.R.: What are emotions? And how can they be measured?. Social Science
Information 44(4), 695--729 (2005)
14.LaMont, K.: Effect of Induced Emotional State on Physical Strength. In: Kurzer, N. (ed.),
Perspectives in Psychology, pp. 3-9. University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia (2000)
15.Siebert, F.W., Oehl, M., Pfister, H.-R.: Gender Differences in Grip-Strength Depending on
Arousal and Valence of Emotions. In: Haack, J., Wiese, H., Abraham, A., Chiarcos, C.
(eds.), Proceedings of KogWis 2010 – 10th Biannual Meeting of the German Society for
Cognitive Science, p. 227. Universitätsverlag Potsdam, Potsdam (2010)
16.Rottenberg, J., Ray, R.D., Gross, J.J.: Emotion Elicitation Using Films. In: Coan, J.A.,
Allen, J.J.B. (eds.), Handbook of Emotion Elicitation and Assessment, pp. 9-28. Oxford
University Press, Oxford (2007)
17.Hewig, J., Hagemann, D., Seifert, J., Gollwitzer, M., Naumann, E., Bartussek, D.: A revised
film set for the induction of basic emotions. Cognition & Emotion 19(7), 1095--1109 (2005)
18.Schaefer, A., Nils, F., Sanchez, X., Philippot, P.: Assessing the effectiveness of a large
database of emotion-eliciting films: A new tool for emotion researchers. Cognition &
Emotion 24(7), 1153--1172 (2010)
19.Lang, P.J.: Behavioral treatment and bio-behavioral assessment: computer applications. In:
Sidowski, J.B., Johnson, J.H., Williams, T.A. (eds.), Technology in mental health care
delivery systems, pp. 119-137. Ablex, Norwood (1980)
20.Bradley, M.M., Lang, P.J.: Measuring Emotion: The Self-Assessment Manikin and the
Semantic Differential. J. Behav. Ther. & Exp. Psychiat. 25(1), 49--59 (1994)
21.Eksioglu, M., Kizilaslan, K.: Steering-wheel grip force characteristics of drivers as a
function of gender, speed, and road condition. International Journal of Industrial
Ergonomics 38, 354--361 (2008)
22.Cheng, S.Y., Trivedi, S.P., M.M.: Multi-spectral and multi-perspective video arrays for
driver body tracking and activity analysis. Computer Vision and Image Understanding 106,
245--257 (2007)

