2013 Humaine Association Conference on Affective Computing and Intelligent Interaction

Shopmobia: An Emotion-based Shop Rating System
Nouf Alajmi
naalajmi@ksu.edu.sa

Eiman Kanjo
ekanjo.c@ksu.edu.sa

Nour El Mawass
nour.elmawass@ieee.org

Alan Chamberlain *
Alan.Chamberlain@nottingham.ac.uk

College of Computer and Information Sciences, King Saud University (Riyadh, Saudi Arabia)
* School of Computer Science, University of Nottingham (United Kingdom)

itself has to be pleasant, warm, cordial, welcoming and
attractive. Its design needs to be focused upon the creation and
development of memorable customer experiences. The ability
to measure customer arousal, in and around a particular store
can help us evaluate and understand the role that these
emotional responses might play in influencing shopping
behaviors.

Abstract—this work proposes a system for rating shops and for
monitoring the cell phone-based emotion responses of customers
in a shopping mall environment. To measure customer
satisfaction in a shopping environment, a mobile, non-intrusive
and comfortable wearable biosensor is used to measure the
Electrodermal Activity (EDA) of the shopper. The users’
proximity to the store is detected using NFC tags that report to
the custom application on the mobile phone. The custom emotion
recognition software analyses these streams of data in real-time
and associates emotion levels to each event. The aim of this
project is to demonstrate the possibility of using pervasive
affective computing to explicate consumer behavior towards the
stores in shopping malls. By triggering positive emotions through
enhancing services and improving advertising campaigns,
retailers can trigger positive emotional states, which ultimately
contribute to a positive and memorable shopping experience.

In this project we measure the physiological changes of the
consumers based around a series of shops located in a shopping
mall environment. The data that was collected from a large
number of users is aggregated and clustered in order to come
up with a rating index that represents the customer satisfaction
level in a particular store.
Mobile sensing technology [3] was key to these
experiments, since mobile phones are widely available and
pervasive affective sensor technology has been developed with
wireless capabilities [4]. Identification and access sensors such
as Near Field Communication (NFC) tags are also on the
increase, particularly in shopping environments. Many mobile
phones are already equipped to communicate with this shortlink technology. Our intention is to use the NFC tags as
proximity sensors, which will easily and reliably mark a
consumer’s presence near a particular shop. This is a new area
of research in relation to the use of NFC tags and their
associated application.

Keywords—Mobile Sensing, Pervasive Computing, Affective
Computing, Electrodermal Activity, Neuro-Marketing.

I.

INTRODUCTION

The joy and instant gratification felt when browsing through
physical shops is irreplaceable for some customers. Emotions
play an important role in our judgment, perception, learning
and many other related cognitive functions. Emotions also have
a considerable effect on our day-to-day decision-making and
our reactions to stimuli. Upon entering a shopping
environment, consumers might experience a vast array of
emotions ranging from, for example; excitement, joy, interest,
and pleasure, through to anger, surprise, frustration, or even
arousal [1].These emotions can affect the physiological state of
the consumers and result in noticeable variations in bodily
arousal [2].

The results will be made available to customers and shop
owners, in similar fashion to Tripadvisor1 and booking.com2.
Emotion signatures taken close to the stores will be available
on a recommender application, available via both mobile and
on a web-based service. The idea of physically labeling and
rating shops may be seen to influence in-store behavior and
impact the outcomes of the interpersonal and dyadic nature of
the retail services, leading to better and more satisfactory retail
service provision.

A shopping mall may be said to be the contemporary
incarnation of the marketplace, it is often made up of a
collection of retail stores, services, food outlets, and leisurebased activities. The shopping mall is a place where urban
citizens can enjoy, and have the ability to physically shop in a
marketplace containing a diverse range of products all within
the confines of a modern indoor setting.

The remainder of the paper is organized thus: Section 2
gives a background to the research, based on related works in
the fields of emotion monitoring and Neuro-Marketing. Section
3 then presents the main research concepts for developing
Shopmobia, including the system design. Section 4 presents

In today’s retail settings, mere customer satisfaction with a
purchased object isn’t sufficient anymore, a bond with the
brand needs to be developed. The current trend within sales
and marketing is to create a durable and personal relationship
between customers and brands. It is not only the brand that the
relationship has to be made with, but the retail environment
978-0-7695-5048-0/13 $26.00 © 2013 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/ACII.2013.138

1

http://www.tripadvisor.com/
http://www.booking.com

2

745

details on the system deployment, data collection and
aggregation and presents the preliminary results of the study.
We conclude by summarizing the research issues relating to
the study and by describing future and ongoing work in
sections 5 and 6.
II.

took place in a big supermarket that contained: an electrical
store; DIY store; household goods; and so on. During the
course of the study, the authors attempted to find the hot spot in
the supermarket, i.e. a place that contains the most positive
emotion, and this led them to conclude that “more happiness is
more satisfaction with the brand”.

RELATED WORK

Emotion is an important factor in the creation of a
successful customer-retailer experience [12], with the
development of the Neuro-marketing concept arising from this.
Neuro-marketing is believed to remove traditional market
research subjectivity. Instead of a customer reporting his
opinion, neuro-marketing uses objective biological measures to
assess a customer state [13]. Many big brands have already
used the concept in order to develop their business and benefit
from these new understandings e.g. Google and Microsoft [14].

For decades, marketing research methods have aimed to
explain and predict the effectiveness of advertising campaigns.
Since emotions are strong mediators of how consumers
process messages, being able to understand and model
cognitive responses to advertising and in-store selling has
always been a challenge.
For instance, researchers have primarily relied upon the
consumers’ abilities to report how they feel about a particular
advertised product, either in a confidential setting such as a
face-to-face interview, surveys, or in a group setting such as a
focus group [24]. Unfortunately, these methods have
considerable limitations. Firstly, they assume that people are
actually able to describe their own cognitive process which we
now know has many subconscious components. Secondly,
numerous factors motivate research participants and can distort
the reporting of their feelings. These include incentives, time
constraints and even peer pressure.

Unlike product evaluation and Neuro-marketing systems,
‘customer experiences’ in stores and mall environments receive
less attention. There is very little literature on how to measure
and evaluate customer emotion. However, user experience
modeling, in the form of store rating is indispensable for
guiding the design of a retail store environment.
The interest in recognizing emotion has increased in recent
years and more people are using sensors to measure biosignals, even though in the past these have been costly.
However, recently, new technological tools have emerged to
allow a robust and affordable measurement [15].

In addition, empirical studies in real-world shopping
environments have shown the usefulness of pervasive
computing technology in physical shopping experiences. Many
researchers have analyzed customers’ trajectories in shopping
environments. For example, Takayuki Kanda et al., [5]
developed a technique to distinguish window shoppers from
busy commuters; Chuang-Wen You et al. [6] devised a
pervasive system to sense physical shopping activities while
tracking shopping time at physical stores. Meschtscherjakov et
al., [7] proposed a prototype display that depicts dynamic
visualizations of customer activity in a retail store on a
conventional map.

The majority of previous studies have focused on studying
Electrodermal Activity (EDA) in lab settings [16]. In order to
understand the meaning of the EDA signal, careful
experimental settings have to be followed. However, this
cannot be the case in a shopping in a real-world context where
it is difficult to control the environmental variables in the
setting. The out-of-lab (in the wild) environment of the study
poses great problems and adds noise and unexpected situations
to the experiments, but also offers great opportunities in regard
to understanding the issues that may impact upon a real-world
design that would be used in such a context.

While shopping, contemporary customers want more than
just a traditional shopping - see and buy - experience. They are
searching for an experience that combines leisure and
entertainment. Researchers and store managers increasingly
acknowledge the importance of the store environment in
shaping a customer’s emotions, thereby creating a memorable
experience of the store. This puts more pressure on retail stores
that want to stand out from their competitors and create a
unique and enjoyable shopping experience [8].

Outdoor, or out-of-lab measurement has been the subject
of several recent studies, such as the sleeping at home
experiments [17], or the "inside out" experiment [18], where
users were asked to wear the EDA sensor continuously during
the day or the night. Unlike our experiment time that focused
upon the time spent on the task (shopping in this case) the
measurement time in these studies was much longer, and can
include recordings of several days and nights, due to its focus
on understanding long term behavioral patterns.

Past research in retailing has found that the specific
characteristics of stores, most notably “appearance, décor,
product assortments, location, service quality and store
atmosphere” affects consumers’ store evaluations and shops
choices [9] [10].

To the best of our knowledge, currently no previous work
has proposed the monitoring of customers’ emotions toward
stores using physiological sensors.
III.

In the emotional shopper study [11] the authors look for
the shoppers’ emotions by tracing their faces. They believe that
facial recognition can give a clearer indication of the
customers’ affective state than self-reporting can. The study

SYSTEM DESIGN

A. Emotion Model In Physical Environment
Mehrabian & Russell [19] proposed a model, which related
features of the surrounding environment to behavioral

746

responses. These responses were mediated by
b the individual’s
emotional states, Pleasure-Arousal-Dom
minance (PAD),
induced by the environment. In 1982, Donnovan & Rossiter
implemented Mehrabian & Russell’s framew
work into retailing
and service settings [20]. Since then, the PA
AD framework has
been widely used in marketing and consumerr research.

by measuring the moisture levvel in skin. The moisture level
varies when an individual iss aroused, stressed or excited,
causing the skin electrical condductance to change as well [16].
By monitoring the EDA, itt is possible to detect periods of
excitement, stress, interest andd attention. For the purpose of
this study, EDA is used as a prroxy to understand how much a
shop stimuli can positively provvoke and engage customers.

Emotional states:
Shop and
enviromental
stimuli

Pleasure
Arousal

For our experiments, we used
u
an Affectiva Q-sensor3, an
Electrodermal Activity (EDA) wristband wearable sensor, that
also measures skin temperatture and 3 dimensional hand
motions. It can be easily wornn on the wrist and can measure
skin conductance in a non-lab environment
e
such as a shopping
mall. Custom software was devveloped for the Android platform
in order to store EDA and skin
s
temperature data using an
instant Bluetooth connection in
i conjunction with the sensor,
see Figure 4.

Approach or
avoidance

Dominance
Figure 1. Emotion flow according to Mehrabian & Russell applied to
a shopping environment.

We adopt the PAD model in this work. Our physiological
sensors measure the emotional reaction to shop stimuli, then
our classification algorithms help in labeeling the data by
categorizing them into emotional traitss. The resulting
qualitative data aided customers and shop owners in
m of Approach or
improving shopping experiences in a form
Avoidance.

The performance of the seensor was evaluated in [22]. Its
ability to measure arousal arouund a particular store can help us
evaluate the role emotion plays
p
in influencing shopping
behaviors outcomes and can lead to a greater understanding of
the role of emotions in the shoppping process.

1 involves taking
The architecture, as shown in Figure 1,
steps in order to provide ultimate shoppingg benefits for both
customers and shop owners, while Figuure 2 shows the
architechture of Shopmobia system.

Therefore, we started coollecting data from different
subjects. This data was storeed in order to help in finding
obvious visual patterns and alsso for feature extraction. Figure
3, shows the EDA data (w
with moving average applied)
collected from one individual around
a
one shop in a happy state
(given a voucher and samplees), Frustrated (with a toddler
present) and relaxed (listening to music) states. The frustrated
signal displays a pattern of faast changes, however the happy
signal displays a phasic patternn.

In the next two sub-sections we desccribe the emotion
monitoring and localisation techniques used in this work.

Emotion
Monitoring
User
Localization

Figure 2. Architecture of the data collectioon system

B. Emotion Monitoring
To monitor emotions we used Galvaniic Skin Response
(GSR) sensors. The autonomic nervous systeem can be divided
into sympathetic and parasympathetic divissions and emotion
can be measured by many sensors. Emotion
E
variation
indicators like heart racing, rapid breathing, tense muscles and
mic nervous system
sweaty palms are all induced by the autonom
which controls heart muscle, smooth musscle, and exocrine
glands [21]. GSR sensors, however, have the advantage of
offering the best indicators of sympatheticc nervous system
arousal. They indirectly display the individuaal’s mental activity

Figure 3. EDA output of subbjects Frustrated, Happy and
Relaxed Localization
L

3

http://www.affectiva.com/q-sensoor

747

shoes and makeup. These malls are Riyadh Gallery4, Hayat
Mall5 and Sahara Plaza6. The former are giant malls with a
large collection of branded clothing, a grocery store and a
spacious food court in each mall; they are seen as the one-stop
entertainment and shopping environments in the city of
Riyadh. We selected shops to give identical or similar brands

Knowing when and where a detected sensing event
occurred can be just as useful as what physically triggered it.
In order to identify which shop the costumer is visiting, we
utilized a shop identification method to suit shopping mall
environment where GPS doesn’t work.
Instead of using exact conventional tracking techniques
such as GPS localization, camera analysis, or sensor networks,
we will utilize NFC to tag user's data with the new shop being
visited. Therefore, the location log relies on precise proximity
information obtained through NFC tags and unlike other
localization technologies; it is characterized by relatively low
computational requirements and is perfectly suited to indoor
environments and shops’ size variance [23]. Not all smart
phones have NFC chips in them. We have adopted Samsung S3
phones in particular as the main mobile platform since they are
equipped with NFC. Figure 4 shows a screenshot of
Shopmobia application.

Figure 5 Riyadh Gallery mall, and ground floor plan where
we deployed our system.

in all three shopping malls.

Figure 4 Shopmobia screenshot

IV.

Before conducting the experiments, each user had to wear
the sensor for a 5-minute warm-up period during which their
skin conductance and body temperature increased to a plateau.
A relaxation period of 10 minutes followed in order to establish
a baseline setting.

DEPLOYMENT AND PRELIMINARY RESULTS

We recruited 24 participants from two major shopping malls in
Riyadh. Participants’ age ranged from 22 to 50 years old. The
majority of our users were women from a variety of
educational backgrounds. Their occupations included
housekeepers, students, teachers and professors. In our
deployment, each user was asked to wear a wristband emotion
sensor, to carry a mobile phone, and to proceed with their
normal shopping around 10 specified stores. The map and the
layout of one of the experiment areas is shown in figure 5. In
this paper, we will focus on data collected in Riyadh Gallery,
where 120 valid entries of location data from 12 users around
10 shops were registered. Entries from 6 other users were
dismissed due to detected errors in the emotion readings and
the NFC localization. While we are still analyzing the data
collected from these experiments, we present in this paper
some preliminary results from our experiments in the Riyadh
Gallery only.

Afterwards the user started shopping around the designated
shops one after the other. The whole experiment took
approximately 40 minutes. NFC tags registered their presences
around shops which allowed us to aggregate the data according
to the shop ID. We used long range (about 50 cm) NFC tags in
order to allow automatic sensor data tagging without direct
contact; however users were advised to walk near the tags.
Figure 6 closely shows an interesting finding in which
multiple skin conductance responses (SCRs) were evident
when the user was entering shoes shops. One user commented,
“When she has to "size up" (buy larger) clothing in the other
shops she gets depressed and feels as if she's overweight. But
when she sizes up a new shoe (get a larger shoe size) it felt
good”. However, it is difficult at this stage to infer whether the
increase in arousal is due to excitement or other factors.

We randomly selected three well known shopping malls in
Riyadh; we then selected representatives’ stores and brands
from these three malls from each of the major types: clothes,

4

http://www.riyadhgallery.com
http://www.hayat-mall.com
6
http://www.saharaplaza.com
5

748

Whose input is the EDA signal and output is a class label
that corresponds to the inferred most prominent emotion. In
other words, we exploited the quantitative emotion patterns
observed through EDA in order to identify the qualitative
aspects of emotions when a customer is nearby a shop. For the
comprehensive analysis, we will develop and compare many
scoring and updating methods based on different machine
learning techniques such as Logistic regression and GMM.
Also, in order to extract one emotional value that represents the
measurements collected at one shop we will consider applying
2-D Gaussian distribution weighted by the residence time at
each measurement. Clustering methods such as k-means are
also being developed to classify each individual aggregated
data.

Figure 6 this graph shows the time against EDA level around 10
shops

An initial statistical feature extraction has been applied on the
dataset of 6 experiments by different users around 10 shops.
We can see higher levels of EDA near shops 3, 6 and 8 which
are mainly shoes shops.

Besides this we are also examining the concept of Emotionbased Recommendation. We can use existing recommendation
algorithms for verifying the affective entity scoring framework.
In addition to studying the variability of emotion levels
within a shopping mall we will look at the variability between
different malls.
Our findings will be disseminated in the form of a shop
rating application to demonstrate the effectiveness of the
system for both customers and shop owners.
VI.

Figure 7. BoxPlot of emotions recorded around 10 shops (6
experiments per shop).

Once the data was statistically analyzed, it proved that the
SCR value had direct relationship with the level of arousal.
In this project, SCR is used for emotion recognition, therefore
observing the change in these values is more important than
the absolute values.
V.

APPLICATIONS

As we have already written there are obvious applications
for the kinds of technology that we are developing,
particularly within the retail, sales and marketing sectors.
Currently we have been examining the role of these sorts of
technologies in regard to their use in in-situ physical settings.
However we envisage that the technologies that we are
developing could also be used within a co-located sales
setting, which is a setting where a customer is physically in a
different place, but is able to use mobile technology to browse
the store and discuss purchases in a face-to-face manner
(although digitally mediated) with a sales assistant. This
would enable us to better understand some of the factors that
make shopping in the real world different from a co-located
shopping experience. We could then attempt to develop
systems that supported co-located shopping in a way that
made it feel better for the customer. Being able to shop in this
manner would also have implications for other shops that are
based outside of the mall, perhaps in rural areas. Imagine
being able to buy products from the bazar or market place, and
being able to enjoy the experience from the comfort of your
own home.

EMOTION CLASSIFICATION AND SHOP RATING

More user experiments are being conducted to produce the
training set based on: 12 participants and 26 datasets in total.
We then apply the running mean on each signal value in order
to distinguish between phasic, fast changes and tonic, slow
moving components in the analyzed signals. The extracted
features from each signal will be: Standard deviation, Mean,
Max, Min, Slope, first and third quartiles.

Robotic sales is also another avenue of research that we can
see evolving from this research, being able to understand
people’s emotional responses to robots in the shopping mall
could prove invaluable, particularly in shops that could be
staffed 24 hours a day, or indeed in robots that may be
designed to carry out mundane tasks such as shopping. By
using the evidence and datasets that we are starting to collate,
one would be able to give robots the ability to react to their
environment in what would appear to be a natural way.

K-mean clustering will be then used as an unsupervised
learning method to classify our data according to the training
set.
We also define the task of inferring the emotion of a user as
a supervised classification problem where we seek to learn a
function f such as:

yi=f(xi)

749

[9]

VII. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have presented the shop rating system based
on customers’ emotion. Such an experimental setup could
have the potential to benefit both customers and shop owners.
Using data collected from a real-world deployment, we argue
that our shop rating system can effectively provide customers
and retailers with systematic feedback regarding customer
satisfaction and enable owners to better understand customer
behaviors. In the future, we hope to scale up to larger
deployments in more shopping malls and recruit more users
from different backgrounds and ages.

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

I.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

[14]

This research project was supported by the Research Center of
the College of Computer and Information Sciences in King
Saud University, project code (RC121265).
II.
[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[15]

REFERENCES

[16]

James R. Bettman, Mary F. Luce, and John W. Payne,
"Constructive consumer choice processes," Journal of consumer
research, vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 187-217, 1998.
Robert J. Donovan, John R. Rossiter, Gilian Marcoolyn, and
Nesdale Andrew, "Store atmosphere and purchasing behavior,"
Journal of Retailing, vol. 70, no. 3, pp. 283–294, 1994.
Eiman Kanjo, Peter Landshoff, David Roberts, and Jean Bacon,
"MobSens: Making Smart Phones Smarter", IEEE Pervasive
Computing,
vol.
8,
issue
4,
pp.
50-57,
2009,
doi:10.1109/MPRV.2009.79.
Eiman Kanjo, and Lulwah Albarrak, "NeuroPlace: Making sense
of a place", 4th International Conference on Augmented Human in
Cooperation with ACM, Stuttgart Germany, ACM, March, 2013.
Doi:10.1145/2459236.2459267.
Takayuki Kanda, Dylan F. Glas, Masahiro Shiomi, Hiroshi
Ishiguro, and Norihiro Hagita, "Who will be the customer?: a
social robot that anticipates people's behavior from their
trajectories," in Proceedings of the 10th international conference
on Ubiquitous computing, 2008, pp. 380-389.
Chuang-Wen You, Chih-Chiang Wei, Yi-Ling Chen, Hao-Hua
Chu, and Ming-Syan Chen, "Using mobile phones to monitor
shopping time at physical stores," Pervasive Computing IEEE, vol.
10, no. 2, pp. 37-43, 2011.
Alexander Meschtscherjakov, Wolfgang Reitberger, Micheal
Lankes, and Manfred Tscheligi, "Enhanced shopping: a dynamic
map in a retail store," in Proceedings of the 10th international
conference on Ubiquitous computing, 2008, pp. 336-339.
Peter C. Verhoef et al., "Customer experience creation:
determinants, dynamics and management strategies," Journal of
Retailing, vol. 85, no. 1, pp. 31-41, 2009.

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]

750

Jordan J. Louviere and Richard D. Johnson., "Reliability and
validity of the brand-anchored conjoint approach to measuring
retailer images," Journal of Retailing, vol. 66, no. 4, pp. 359-382,
1990.
J. E. B. M. Steenkamp and Michel Wedel, "Segmenting retail
markets on store image using a consumer-based methodology,"
Journal of Retailing, 1991.
Orlando Wood and Wendy Lanchin, "The emotional shopper: why
understanding how your consumers are feeling can improve
business effects," 2011.
M. Healy, M. Beverland, Harmen Oppewal, and Sean Sands,
"Understanding retail experiences: The case for ethnography,"
International Journal of Market Research, vol. 49, no. 6, pp. 751778, 2007.
Kevin Randall. (2009, September) Neuromarketing Hope and
Hype: 5 Brands Conducting Brain Research. [Online].
fastcompany.com.
"Neuromarketing: When science and marketing collide," 4imprint,
2010.
Nour El-Mawass, and Eiman Kanjo, "A Supermarket Stress Map",
Workshop on “Pervasive Technologies in Retail Environments”,
Ubicomp conference, Zurich, Switzerland, ACM, September,
2013.
Rui Henriques, Ana Paiva, and Cláudia Antunes, "On the need of
new methods to mine electrodermal activity in emotion-centered
studies," Agents and Data Mining Interaction, pp. 203-215, 2013.
Akane Sano and Rosalind W. Picard, "Toward a taxonomy of
autonomic sleep patterns with electrodermal activity," in
Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, EMBC, 2011
Annual International Conference of the IEEE, 2011, pp. 777-780.
J. Hernandez, D. McDuff, R. Fletcher, and R. W. Picard, "InsideOut: Reflecting on your Inner State," in Work-in-progress in
Pervasive Computing, San Diego, CA, 2013.
Albert Mehrabian and James A. Russell, An approach to
environmental psychology. Cambridge, MA: MIT press., 1974,
vol. 11.
Robert J. Donovan and John R. Rossiter, "Store atmosphere: an
environmental psychology approach," Journal of retailing, vol. 58,
no. 1, pp. 34-57, 1982.
Hisanori Kataoka et al., "Development of a skin temperature
measuring system for non-contact stress evaluation," in In
Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society 1998. Proceedings
of the 20th Annual International Conference of the IEEE., vol. 2,
1998, pp. 940-943.
Ming-Zher Poh, Nicholas C. Swenson, and Rosalind W. Picard, "A
wearable sensor for unobtrusive, long-term assessment of
electrodermal activity," Biomedical Engineering, IEEE
Transactions on, vol. 57, no. 5, pp. 1243-1252, 2010.
Ben Zhang et al., "Location-log: Bringing Online Shopping
Benefits to the Physical World with Magnetic-based Proximity
Detection," 2012.
Iris B Mauss, Michael D Robinso,n "Measures of emotion: A
review". Cognition and Emotion. 2009; 23(2):209-237. pp.209237. DOI:10.1080/02699930802204677

